Climate CentralAbout usAbout usTeamCareersPress releasesEquityOur storyOur approachOur workProgramsToolsSpecial topicsData productsSea Level RiseClimate Central’s Program on Sea Level Rise strives to provide accurate, clear and granular information about sea level rise and coastal flood hazards both locally and globally, today and tomorrow. Climate MattersClimate Matters is a reporting resource program that helps meteorologists and journalists report on climate impacts and solutions in ways that are local, immediate, and personal — grounded in the latest science.Partnership JournalismClimate Central's Partnership Journalism program collaborates with local newsrooms nationwide, including print, radio, digital and TV outlets.Climate Shift Index ™Revealing the realtime fingerprints of climate change on local weathersee all programsImpactStoriesResearchGiveGive nowWays to giveResourcesOpen search boxSearchCheck the Climate Shift Index™ to score climate change's influence on today's temperature anywhere.Researching and communicating climate change impacts and solutionsWe use science and technology to generate thousands of local storylines and compelling visuals that make climate change personal and show what can be done about it.About usScience made clearHelping journalists bring climate science into reportingClimate MattersExploration made easyPowerful tools to understand impacts and solutionsCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsGlobal Climate Shift IndexSee the daily influence of climate change on local temperatures around the world.Picturing Our FutureVisualize how climate and energy choices this decade will influence sea levels for hundreds of years.Sinking Tax BaseQuantify the impact of sea level rise on county tax bases as property lines move inland.Climate Shift IndexDemonstrate immediate impacts by using the Climate Shift Index (TM) to put a number on the daily influence of climate change on local weather conditions.Weather PowerCreate and download graphical forecasts of daily wind or solar electricity generation for any U.S. media market, county, or congressional districtRisk FinderExplore the risks of sea level rise and coastal flooding in any U.S. community with downloadable tables and figures, maps, local projections, and potential impacts to populations, land, property values, and moreCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsGlobal Climate Shift IndexSee the daily influence of climate change on local temperatures around the world.Picturing Our FutureVisualize how climate and energy choices this decade will influence sea levels for hundreds of years.Sinking Tax BaseQuantify the impact of sea level rise on county tax bases as property lines move inland.Climate Shift IndexDemonstrate immediate impacts by using the Climate Shift Index (TM) to put a number on the daily influence of climate change on local weather conditions.Weather PowerCreate and download graphical forecasts of daily wind or solar electricity generation for any U.S. media market, county, or congressional districtRisk FinderExplore the risks of sea level rise and coastal flooding in any U.S. community with downloadable tables and figures, maps, local projections, and potential impacts to populations, land, property values, and moreCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsRealtime reporting resourcesProduction-ready, localized visuals just a click awayExplore all Climate Matters materials in our resource libraryClimate MattersBurning Hot:  Years of Fire Weather Across the United StatesIncreasing heat and dryness are putting more people at risk from fire weather across America. Climate Matters Summer PackageSummer is here and hotter than ever. Summers have warmed in  U.S. locations—by .°F on average since .Climate MattersMore Risky Heat Days in  U.S. LocationsThe annual number of risky heat days has increased in  U.S. locations since , according to Climate Central analysis.Climate MattersSevere Storm, Supercell, and Tornado TrendsMore billion-dollar severe storms. More storms with tornadic potential. Severe weather hazards shifting east into additional vulnerable communities—and extending earlier into winter months. Climate MattersShifting Planting ZonesAs the U.S. warms, planting zones are shifting north—affecting which plants farmers and gardeners can grow in their local area. Climate MattersIntroducing the Global Climate Shift Index ™Climate Central's new CSI-Global tool provides real-time scores indicating how climate change is affecting daily temperatures around the world—including ,+ cities.Climate MattersBillion-Dollar Disasters in The U.S. has already experienced  billion-dollar disasters in —well above the annual average, reflecting the long-term rise in the frequency of such devastating events. High-impact news collaborationsPartnerships supporting local newsrooms with world-class resourcesLearn moreWind of Change: Energy Blows Across Nebraska Thanks to Wind Farms(With The Reader)Partnership JournalismApril , Surviving the Water: New York City’s Flooding Crisis in the Age of Climate Change(With Documented)Partnership JournalismApril , The View from Above: Climate Change Poses Threats to Nebraska’s Birds — And People(With The Reader)Partnership JournalismMarch , US coastal wetlands are rapidly disappearing. Here's what it'll take to save them(With Quartz)Partnership JournalismMarch , Fire weather extremes make prescribed burns riskier, but more essential than ever(With KUNR)Partnership JournalismDecember , After Ian and Nicole, experts warn of health risks from blue-green algae(With ADAPTWJCT)Partnership JournalismNovember , As rising seas flood Charleston's fairways, its municipal golf course leads in adapting(With ABC Charleston)Partnership JournalismNovember , How climate change could sink NJ’s tax base — and not just at the Shore(with NJ Spotlight News)Partnership JournalismOctober , Historic Harriet Tubman Sites at Risk of Rising Seas on Eastern Shore(with NBC Washington)Partnership JournalismApril , Data may be Colorado’s best bet to mitigate increasing wildfire risk on the Front Range(with The Colorado Sun)Partnership JournalismJanuary , A world made safer for allCritical work in support of socially and economically disadvantaged groupsLearn moreNewsletter signupLooking for Climate Matters? Sign up hereSign upSee monthly highlights from Climate CentralSupport our work There are lots of ways to help fund Climate Central todayLearn moreContact UsCareersGive nowWays to giveFinancialsFundersFacebookYouTubeCopyright ©  Climate CentralTerms of usePrivacy policyEditorial independence
 Global Warming and Climate Change skepticism examined Look up a Term Close Panel CLAM Bake Close Clams Climate Science Glossary Term Lookup Enter a term in the search box to find its definition. Settings Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off). Term Lookup Term: Define Settings Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life:  seconds  seconds  seconds  seconds  minute Until closed All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. -. Cambridge University Press. Home Arguments Software Resources Comments The Consensus Project Translations About Support Climate's changed before It's the sun It's not bad There is no consensus It's cooling Models are unreliable Temp record is unreliable Animals and plants can adapt It hasn't warmed since  Antarctica is gaining ice View All Arguments Username Password New? Register here Forgot your password? Latest Posts Patrick Brown's recycled hallucination of climate science Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Climate Adam: If we stop emitting then what..? At a glance - Does cold weather disprove global warming? Hotter ocean temperatures from global warming likely increased Idalia’s destructive power by at least -%  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Exploring the feasibility of a new feature: Bunk of the Week Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle: Downloads and Translations At a glance - Is CO a pollutant? John F. Clauser: the latest climate science-denying physicist  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # From Knowledge to Power - an interview with John Perona: scientist, author, and blogger Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  How is climate change affecting China’s cropland? At a glance - How much is sea level rising? Eastern Canada wildfires: Climate change doubled likelihood of ‘extreme fire weather’  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  ClimateAdam: The Vlog Brothers on geoengineering At a glance - How substances in trace amounts can cause large effects Hawaii’s climate future: Dry regions get drier with global warming, increasing fire risk - while wet areas get wetter  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Climate Adam: Could Climate Change cause an Ocean Tipping Point Soon..? At a glance - Is extreme weather caused by global warming? Do phrases like ‘global boiling’ help or hinder climate action?  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Working in the Rebuttals Update Factory Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Archives Explaining climate change science & rebutting global warming misinformation Global warming is real and human-caused. It is leading to large-scale climate change. Under the guise of climate "skepticism", the public is bombarded with misinformation that casts doubt on the reality of human-caused global warming. This website gets skeptical about global warming "skepticism". Our mission is simple: debunk climate misinformation by presenting peer-reviewed science and explaining the techniques of science denial, discourses of climate delay, and climate solutions denial. Patrick Brown's recycled hallucination of climate science Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom Creating external costs Coming off very much as a disgruntled ex-academic, the Breakthrough Institute's Patrick Brown recently blew his top over what some might interpret as frustration about failure to place enough articles on their own merit into "prestige" journals. Brown decided to deal with that by tactical expediency, leaving him feeling squeamish and seeking to explain and justify himself— by smearing his former colleagues in research. Brown vents his pent-up feelings in an op-ed which has poured like sweet music into the desperately thirsty and pathetically grateful ears of climate science deniers spanning the globe. We'll be hearing echoes of Brown's impulsively emotional blurt for a very long time given that workable material for climate contrarians to repeat is scanty— meaning Brown has caused durable material harm to climate progress. It's to no good end. There's no silver lining here, no net gain, no legitimate cause being promoted; Brown's opinions are easily shown as factually incorrect. Brown's screed hinges on a set of bold claims in connection with a paper recently published in Nature for which he was lead author. The underpinnings of Brown's assertions are that he's juiced his work into rare success by employing deceptive practices. He frames his argument as a mea culpa, belated regret over choices he freely made and apparently would now like to excuse by scapegoating bystanders— another risky choice. From his anecdotal self-imposed experience through creating an outlier report, Brown concludes that he "knows" things: "I knew not to try to quantify key aspects other than climate change in my research because it would dilute the story that prestigious journals like Nature and its rival, Science, want to tell." "And the editors of these journals have made it abundantly clear, both by what they publish and what they reject, that they want climate papers that support certain preapproved narratives—even when those narratives come at the expense of broader knowledge for society." "The first thing the astute climate researcher knows is that his or her work should support the mainstream narrative" "we didn’t bother to study the influence of these other obviously relevant factors. Did I know that including them would make for a more realistic and useful analysis? I did. But I also knew that it would detract from the clean narrative centered on the negative impact of climate change and thus decrease the odds that the paper would pass muster with Nature’s editors and reviewers." Brown is long on accusations but comes up short on evidence, in common with previous variations on a broad theme we've often heard: "climate science and academic peer review are suborned by a cabal of [globalists] [communists] [progressives] [other conspiratorial hobbyhorse]." And scientists, of course. We've already read these scripts and "scientists are corrupt" is boringly familiar— and wrong. Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables In this week's governmentNGO section we have a survey from IPSOS gauging experience of climate change in the day-to-day by persons in the US, One in four Americans say climate change will make it harder to live in their area. Many people struggle to separate their sensory perceptions from matters of metaphysics, with ideology strongly coloring their worldview. We live in a world that is quantitatively different than that our parents were born into, but we don't necessarily see that: Perhaps because of the wide-reaching experience with extreme weather this summer, about one in four Americans say climate change will make it more difficult to live in their area, and most expect extreme weather to continue in the future. Notably, partisanship colors Americans’ experience with extreme weather and their views on climate change overall, with more Democrats reporting experiences with extreme weather and belief in the adverse effects of climate change than Republicans. The IPSOS survey tapped into consciousness of what it means to live in a warming world, and with increasingly frequency that means living through heatwaves. The meaning and import of terms varies; experts on weather understand heatwaves differently than laypeople or epidemiologists. In Climatic Change Sofia Boni et al. thoroughly explore the concept and meaning of "heatwave" and how impacts of heatwaves are perceived and processed in a variety of ways, all challenged by the non-stationarity of our moderm climate. It's good to get onto the same page with such matters, and What is a heat(wave)? An interdisciplinary perspective gets that job done. Let alone addressing main urgencies, cooperation against a common enemy might have side-benefits. Via Advances in Climate Change Research Cui et al. deliver a highly detailed assessment of respective coal generation plant inventory for two global superpowers, with an eye to coordinated retirement. A U.S.-China coal power transition and the global . °C pathway describes some low-hanging fruit that could be dragged down by two major actors working in concert, yieldingswift and deep emission reductions: Globally, the joint U.S.-China coal transition itself can lower overall energy-related CO emissions by about % in  relative to , and a catalytic effect from the possibility of other country taking compatible actions would increase the emission reductions to % by . In their opinion piece Proposing a .°C climate target for a safer future in PLOS Climate, Breyer et al. provide a brief but well-grounded and compelling argument to rethink the safety of the globally agreed .°C allowable amount of planetary surface temperature rise. They go on to identify components to drop that figure by rd, and in so doing they must hypothesize DACCS (direct air capture with carbon storage) on a massive scale. DACCS is the plaything of legacy energy interests and hence buffeted by bad ink and bad optics but stripping that aside, what about the math? That can and should be handled seperately, for calm consideration: To attain a .°C climate target within acceptable certainty, about  GtCOa of CDR would be needed from the early s onwards. While enormous, in that it would approximate current CO emissions, this amount of CDR using DACCS would require only –% of global primary energy demand under two conditions: continued very rapid scaling of PV and strong energy efficiency gains of low-temperature DACCS by utilising heat pumps, while low-cost heat for DACCS may be also supplied by geothermal or solar thermal heat. Under these conditions, a .°C world would become plausible in industrial, financial, and societal terms. Diverse CDR portfolios combining different natural climate solutions and sustainable technological solutions can enable the massive CDR needed for achieving a .°C climate target by end-century facilitating safe climate conditions for civilisation. Renewable energy deployment in Europe: Do politics matter?, Silva et al., Environment, Development & Sustainability. Spot the key unsupported conclusion in this arguably neoliberal-tinged analysis. Nobody with common sense likes being boxed into further tampering with Earth's climate system, but arguing over that without full information won't close the issue or make the option magically go away. Yue et al. publishing in Nature Climate and Atmospheric Science break some new ground and find a mixed bag, in Thermosteric and dynamic sea level under solar geoengineering. The authors report that sea level wouldn't be affected equally on all coastlines with large employment of SAI (stratospheric aerosol injection), arguably complicating an already challenging decision space. Results hint at matters of equity and as well impacts on potentially important carbon feedback reservoirs. Unprecedented Historical Erosion of US Gulf Coast: A Consequence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise?, Anderson et al., Earth's Future. Cutting to the chase: Yes. The ubiquitous shift toward increased shoreline erosion along the US Gulf Coast during the th century is most plausibly due to the historical acceleration of sea-level rise, currently about an order of magnitude faster than during the late Holocene. With the continued increase in the rate of sea-level rise, coastal populations, engineered shorelines, and use of dwindling sand resources along the US Gulf Coast, there is a critical need to adapt management practices to this new state of continuous landward retreat. Given the variable behavior of wave-dominated coasts during the late Holocene and modern times, coastal inundation models are poorly suited for predicting changes in wave-dominated coastal settings in coming decades. These models likely under-estimate the rate and magnitude of change.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects A strong high-temperature event in late-spring  in Yunnan province, Southwest China: Characteristics and possible causes, Dong et al., Atmospheric Research .j.atmosres.. An asymmetric relationship between Tibetan Plateau surface temperature regimes and oceanic–atmospheric circulations, Bafitlhile & Liu, International Journal of Climatology .joc. Causes of  summer marine heatwave in the East China Seas, Hong-Jian et al., Advances in Climate Change Research Open Access .j.accre... Contrasting Deep and Shallow Winter Warming over the Barents–Kara Seas on the Intraseasonal Time Scale, Li et al., Journal of Climate .jcli-d--. Doubling of surface oceanic meridional heat transport by non-symmetry of mesoscale eddies, Wang et al., Nature Communications Open Access pdf .s--- Evaluation of multi-level upper ocean heat content and its relationship with intensity and translation speed of tropical cyclones in the North Indian Ocean, Albert & Bhaskaran, Theoretical and Applied Climatology .s--- Read more  comments Climate Adam: If we stop emitting then what..? Posted on  September  by Guest Author This video includes conclusions of the creator climate scientist Dr. Adam Levy. It is presented to our readers as an informed perspective. Please see video description for references (if any). Burning fossil fuels is heating the planet. But if we quit our fossil fuel habit and stop emitting greenhouse gases what happens then? Answers seem to vary from "global warming will stop" to "we can expect more and more climate change to come". So which is right? And what would it really take to stop climate change and protect ourselves as much as possible? Support ClimateAdam on patreon: https:patreon.comclimateadam Read more  comments At a glance - Does cold weather disprove global warming? Posted on  September  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "Does cold weather disprove global warming?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance Late November-early December  saw a memorable, bitterly cold snap in the UK that many residents will still remember. According to the UK Met Office on the night of November -: "Last night saw November minimum temperature records fall across the country. Most notably both Wales and Northern Ireland recorded the coldest November night since records began. In Wales, temperatures fell to - °C at Llysdinam, near Llandrindod Wells, Powys. Northern Ireland recorded -. °C at Lough Fea. Scotland recorded a minimum temperature of -. °C at Loch Glascarnoch, whilst England recorded -. °C at Topcliffe in North Yorkshire." Brr! But it pays to have a bit of a look around. Did you know that during the very same night, parts of Western Greenland hit plus  Celsius? That's more than  degrees Celsius warmer than Wales! The reason for that remarkable difference in temperature was the weather. An elongated and slow-moving area of high pressure was situated in the North Atlantic, extending up into the Arctic. As a consequence, because air flows around high pressure systems in a clockwise direction, on the high's left flank warm air was being dragged up into normally chilly Western Greenland. But down its right flank there came cold Arctic air, surging southwards towards Europe, hence those unusually low temperatures. It's easy to confuse current weather events with long-term climate trends. It's a bit like being at the beach, trying to figure out if the tide is rising or falling just by watching two or three individual waves roll in and out. The slow change of the tide is masked by the constant churning of the waves. Watch for - minutes and you should get a much better idea. In a similar way, the normal ups and downs of local weather can often mask slow changes in global climate. To find climate trends you need to look at how weather is changing over a longer time span. Looking at high and low temperature data from recent decades shows that new record highs occur nearly twice as often as new record lows. New records for cold weather will continue to be set (although that -C for Wales in November  will take some beating), but global warming's gradual influence will make them increasingly rare. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments Hotter ocean temperatures from global warming likely increased Idalia’s destructive power by at least -% Posted on  September  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Yale Climate Connections by Jeff Masters Hurricane Idalia charged ashore into Florida’s Big Bend coast on Wednesday morning, Aug. , as a powerful high-end Category  storm with  mph winds, bringing an extremely dangerous storm surge, destructive winds, and torrential rains to an area unused to major hurricanes. The story of Idalia’s devastation has yet to be written, but there is little doubt that human-caused climate change will be identified as a key contributor. Hurricanes are heat engines that take heat energy out of the ocean and convert it to the kinetic energy of their winds. A hotter ocean will allow hurricanes to grow more powerful, assuming that the other factors that power hurricanes, including low wind shear and a moist atmosphere, are present. As far back as , MIT hurricane scientist Kerry Emanuel theorized that the wind speeds in hurricanes can be expected to increase about % for every one degree Celsius (.°F) increase in tropical ocean temperature, assuming that the average wind speed near the surface of the tropical oceans does not change. Computer modeling has found a slightly smaller magnitude (%) for the increase. A -% increase in hurricane winds may not seem like a big deal, but damage from a hurricane increases exponentially with an increase in winds. For example, according to NOAA, a Category  hurricane with  mph winds will do  times the damage of a Category  hurricane with  mph winds. This includes damage not only from winds, but also from storm surge, inland flooding, and tornadoes. Bottom line: A -% increase in winds yields about a -% increase in the destructive potential of a hurricane (Figure ). Figure . Damage multiplier for hurricane winds compared to a minimal Category  hurricane with  mph winds. A doubling of the wind speed from  mph to  mph increases potential damage by a factor of . (Image credit: NOAA) Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  September  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Sep ,  thru Sat, Sep , . Story of the Week Lee adds to a growing trend of intense hurricanes powered by warmer oceans Source: NOAA's National Hurricane Center Hurricane Lee rapidly intensified at a historic pace into a Category  storm Thursday night, adding to a spate of extremely intense hurricanes this year and in recent decades which experts say is a symptom of the climate crisis. Lee is now the eighth Category  storm in the North Atlantic since , which means % of Category  hurricanes on record in the basin have occurred in the last seven years, a CNN analysis of NOAA’s hurricane database shows. This year alone, Category  storms have already appeared in all seven ocean basins where tropical cyclones form, including Hurricane Jova, which also rapidly strengthened into a Category  storm earlier this week. “The increase in Category  or  storms, especially that we’ve seen over the last couple years due to the increase in rapid intensification, is a telltale sign of climate change, which is exactly what we expect to see in a warmer world,” Kevin Reed, a hurricane expert and professor at Stony Brook University’s school of marine and atmospheric sciences, told CNN. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on the CNN website. Lee adds to a growing trend of intense hurricanes powered by warmer oceans by Rachel Ramirez, Weather, CNN, Sep ,  Read more  comments Exploring the feasibility of a new feature: Bunk of the Week Posted on  September  by BaerbelW We'd like to improve our agility for dealing with newly-emergent climate misinformation, revisitation of old claims by people in general, and misinformers on platforms with high potential for causing harm. So, we're exploring publishing a weekly feature, with the working title "Bunk of the Week." We'd appreciate and value your help in shaping our direction. If you care to help, please answer the following questions via this Google form: Would a "bunk of the week" be helpful? Yes No Don't Know What would you like to see debunked? Specific agenda-driven misinforming articles social media posts etc. with high profile Misinformation frequently repeated by many people in a variety of contexts News-driven topical and "trendy" misinformation Novel, unfamiliar climate misinformation Do you have current examples? What could such a feature be called? Question # invites "other" and we'd like to know your thoughts on that as well. For question # we are looking for current examples of what you'd like to see debunked. For any selected category, some samples would be helpful. For now, this is just to gather information to get a better handle on how much "input" there is readily available to feed into such a weekly publication. Therefore, please don't expect any actual debunkings for your submissions right away (sorry about that!). "Bunk of the Week" is our working title but there might be better ones. If you have a suggestion for another title please let us know in response to question #. Thanks for your help and filling out the short Google form! Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables Included in this week's governmentNGO section the World Meteorological Organization has released its annual retrospective of our previous year's climate situation, State of the Climate in  (pdf): “While greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise and the climate continues to change, populations worldwide continue to be gravely impacted by extreme weather and climate events. For example, in , continuous drought in East Africa, record breaking rainfall in Pakistan and record-breaking heatwaves in China and Europe affected tens of millions, drove food insecurity, boosted mass migration, and cost billions of dollars in loss and damage.” — WMO Secretary-General Prof. Petteri Taalas. Also in this week's governmentNGO roundup, Wildfire Misinformation: Arson Claims Set the Climate Debate Ablaze (pdf), from Climate Action Against Disinformation. Via Geophysical Research Letters, a concerning report suggesting that our climate models are likely undershooting what we may well see in the not-so-distant future in Antarctica. In The Largest Ever Recorded Heatwave—Characteristics and Attribution of the Antarctic Heatwave of March , Blanchard-Wigglesworth et al. report: The March  Antarctic heatwave registered the warmest temperature anomaly on record, and resulted from extreme atmospheric heat fluxes A widely used climate model cannot simulate equivalent events in a large ensemble, a bias that is improved after nudging its winds to observations The thermodynamic amplification of the heatwave by climate change was °C, and equivalent heatwaves may warm a further –°C by  The latter finding means that the interior East Antarctica icecap may see near-melting temperatures toward the end of this century. The authors report success with helping models at least approximate what reality has already delivered, but much needs to be done to gain confidence. To a jaded eye steeped in a thick soup of rubbishy climate propaganda, it seems as though there's something important missing in Why don’t Americans trust university researchers and why it matters for climate change, just published in PLOS Climate. Authors Alvarez, Debnath & Ebanks report results and analysis of a sizeable (N=,) representative sample of residents of the United States, seeking to determine what shapes public perceptions of the reliability of the academic community in the minds of the public when we think about climate science. Specifically, the survey elicits: i) How is trust in science associated with belief in the importance of climate change as a problem? ii) How is trust in science associated with beliefs about whether climate change is caused by humans or nature? iii) Who trusts university research centers? Findings are familiar, broadly replicating previous associations between trust in science and ideological alignments. With these results in hand, the authors offer suggestions: First, more research must be done to understand who trusts or distrusts university research on climate change and who is persuadable. Second, more research is needed on climate communication framing and messaging. Third, additional research on appropriate messaging is necessary. Finally, we need to develop a culture of trust in climate research and how it is communicated across society. What's missing? Accounting for widely broadcast and consumed synthetic climate bunk. Investigation and resultant suggestions of this kind are disordered in the same sense that attempting to inflate a leaking tire without seeing the puncture causing the leak will lead to enduring puzzlement over the tire's failure to obediently inflate and stay that way. The beliefs of Americans about climate science and climate scientists are buffeted and battered by a concerted, multi-decade industrialized (and industrial) misinformation and disinformation campaign (Treen et al. , see numerous others in cites therein). It's principally for this reason that Skeptical Science and our colleagues exist. Sampling without "why do you believe this" andor "who told you so" arguably leads to a myopic, impoverished perspective of the public mental landscape. It seems reasonable to suppose that attempts to understand and foster trust in researchers involved in matters to do with climate must take into account active measures engaged in destroying that trust, or risk mysterious failure. The information in the authors' study is of course useful, but it leads to an all-too familiar conclusion, akin to a victim of a battering relationship chronically stuck at the stage of "what can -I- do to please the person beating me so they'll stop," even when cause is not personal to the victim. This itself is a framing of belief the climate science community might do well to keep in frame, lest communications become needlessly distorted in pursuit of impossible goals. The Journal of Enivronmental Psychology brings us Conspiracy theories and climate change: A systematic review, by Tam and Chan. As advertised, the authors collate previous research on the connection between conspiracy ideation and conspiratorial beliefs about climate change. Some studies take unfamiliar directions, such as finding penetration of typical partisanideological boundaries. With what's been accomplished gathered together, omissions become easier to see and Tam and Chan produce a list of promising avenues for gap-filling and further understanding. Some of their questions are in fact germane to our remarks above about Alvarez et al. The paper is not least a great way to get a holistic grip on this weird feature of climate cognition.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects A Regime Shift on Weddell Sea Continental Shelves with Local and Remote Physical and Biogeochemical Implications is Avoidable in a °C Scenario, Nissen et al., Journal of Climate Open Access pdf .jcli-d--. Atmospheric Latent Energy Transport Pathways into the Arctic and Their Connections to Sea Ice Loss during Winter over the Observational Period, Liang et al., Journal of Climate .jcli-d--. Atmospheric Response to a Collapse of the North Atlantic Circulation under a Mid-Range Future Climate Scenario: A Regime Shift in Northern Hemisphere Dynamics, Orbe et al., Journal of Climate Open Access .jcli-d--. Read more  comments The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle: Downloads and Translations Posted on  September  by BaerbelW Published in January , The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle offers background information and classroom activity ideas for educators interested in using the Cranky Uncle game to teach critical thinking in their classes. The Cranky Uncle game builds resilience against misinformation and strengthens players’ critical thinking. It achieves this through inoculation—explaining the rhetorical techniques used to mislead. The denial techniques in the game are built on the five techniques of science denial outlined in the FLICC framework. One of the activities in the Teachers’ Guide is the Please Don’t Fail Me assignment, designed by Melanie Trecek-King from Thinking is Power. Melanie has also written a blog post going into greater detail into this assignment and how students responded. Other suggested activities include Introduction to FLICC Walk-through game Roleplaying Have students create misinformation Debunking misinformation  and more Translations Read more  comments At a glance - Is CO a pollutant? Posted on  September  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "Is CO a pollutant?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance If you look up the definition of pollution in a dictionary, you will soon realise it's rather subjective. There are many substances out there that are harmless at certain levels but harmful at others. Carbon dioxide is well-mixed in our atmosphere. That's because when it is emitted, by any mechanism from a vehicle exhaust to a volcanic eruption, it stays in the air for many years. Unlike water, it does not condense and fall back out as rain. Turbulence does a splendid job of mixing it evenly into the air. But there are places on - and in - Earth where much higher concentrations of CO may be encountered. The trouble with CO is that it cannot be seen and neither can it be smelt. In other words we cannot detect it from a safe distance. In caves and mines, high concentrations of CO are a well-known hazard. They can result from things like rotting timber, oxidising coal and particularly by poor ventilation, where that mixing into the air fails to occur. Because CO is heavier than air, in poorly ventilated areas underground it may collect into pockets waiting for the unwary. Miners or underground explorers breathing a higher than normal concentration of CO will experience gradually increasing ill effects. It depends on the concentration of the gas. For example the UK Health and Safety Executive has defined safe CO limits for the workplace. The limit for long-term exposure is .% (, ppm) but for shorter encounters it is %. Anything over that figure is regarded as a risk to human health. There have been many accidents and fatalities over the years caused by high concentrations of CO in underground workings and to a lesser extent in caves. Coal-miners refer to CO as black- or choke-damp in recognition of the hazard. Possibly the worst CO-related disaster was that of  August  at Lake Nyos, in northwestern Cameroon in western Central Africa. The lake, only some  x  km in size but more than  m deep, is one of a number of flooded volcanic vents in a sporadically-active volcanic belt. Carbon dioxide-bearing springs are common in this area and some are present in the lake-bed. Lake Nyos is typically stratified, meaning that normally its waters occur in distinct layers with different chemistry that do not normally mix. In something of a loaded gun scenario, the bottom layer used to become saturated with CO from those lake-bed springs. On st August , something caused an overturning of the lake, meaning the deep CO-saturated water headed for the surface. Like taking the top off a shaken-up pop bottle, a vast cloud of CO was instantly released and travelled out from the lake along the ground. At least , people and , livestock died instantly from asphyxiation. Modern technology and international cooperation have since been successful in controlling the build-up of CO in lakes like Nyos. But clearly, in specific circumstances, CO is as deadly a pollutant as any other. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments John F. Clauser: the latest climate science-denying physicist Posted on  September  by dana It’s a familiar story – the physicist who draws attention for declaring that climate scientists have got climate science all wrong. He (it’s always a ‘he’) was born before color television was invented, usually retired, perhaps having won a Nobel Prize, but with zero climate science research or expertise. William Happer. Ivar Giaever. Roger Cohen. Freeman Dyson. Steven Koonin. Robert Laughlin. The latest example from this mould is John F. Clauser. Although Clauser has never published any peer-reviewed climate science research, he has made several climate-related claims whose veracity we will examine below. Yes, humans are responsible for the increase in CO In a July  interview with the Epoch Times, Clauser claimed that the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO) “may or may not be made by human beings. It doesn't really matter where it comes from.” That's a bit like saying, "I don't know what atoms are made of, but it doesn't really matter. Let me tell you why particle physics is all wrong." In reality, several lines of evidence have proven the incontrovertible fact that the human combustion of fossil fuels – which today releases nearly  billion tons of CO per year – is entirely responsible for the % increase in Earth’s atmospheric CO concentrations since the Industrial Revolution. For example, there’s basic accounting: those  billion tons of CO have to go somewhere, and Earth’s natural sinks like the oceans and biosphere only absorb about half of those emissions. The other half ends up in the atmosphere, as explained in the Denialx video below. And atmospheric carbon isotope ratio measurements also demonstrate that the CO increase is coming from ancient plant matter, a.k.a. fossil fuels. Anyone who understands even the most basic aspects of climate science should not question such a simple and thoroughly-established fact. Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  September  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Aug ,  thru Sat, Sep , . Story of the Week Falsehoods Follow Close Behind This Summer’s Natural Disasters Misattributed videos, recycled lies and warped fears are fueling unfounded claims about the recent record-breaking heat, floods and wildfires. As natural disasters and extreme environmental conditions became more commonplace around the world this summer, scientists pointed repeatedly to a shared driver: climate change. Conspiracy theorists pointed to anything but. Some claimed falsely that the record-smashing heat waves blistering parts of North America, Europe and Asia were normal, and that they had been sensationalized as part of a globalist hoax. Others made up tales that cloud-seeding airplanes or a nearby dam, rather than torrential rains, had caused the unusually intense flooding in northern Italy (and in places like Vermont and Rwanda). The devastating wildfire on Maui this month produced especially ludicrous claims. Social media that racked up millions of views blamed the blaze on a “directed energy weapon” (the evidence: years-old footage not recorded in Hawaii). And as Florida braced this week for Hurricane Idalia, some people claimed incorrectly online that such storms are not affected by fossil fuel emissions. The unfounded claims that now regularly follow natural disasters and dangerous weather, contradicting a preponderance of scientific evidence, can often seem frivolous and fantastical. They persist, however — attracting large audiences and frustrating climate experts, who say the world has little time to evade a global warming catastrophe. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on The New York Times website. Falsehoods Follow Close Behind This Summer’s Natural Disasters Misattributed videos, recycled lies and warped fears are fueling unfounded claims about the recent record-breaking heat, floods and wildfires. by Tiffany Hsu, Media, New York Times, Aug ,  Read more  comments From Knowledge to Power - an interview with John Perona: scientist, author, and blogger Posted on  September  by BaerbelW A short while ago John Perona got in touch to make us aware of his weekly newsletter „Earthward“ and his website „From Knowledge to Power“. We found it to be another resource with some mission similarities to Skeptical Science but with a strong identity of its own, and powerful content with a more policy-centric approach. As we were excited to learn about John’s website, we collaborated with him for this interview-style blog post to learn more about his background and how his site came to be. Could you please tell us a bit about your science background? I’m an academic research scientist by profession, originally trained as a quantitative biochemist specializing in enzyme structure-function relationships and especially the interactions of protein enzymes with DNA and RNA. However, I also had the good fortune to spend childhood summers in the Italian Alps with my extended family, and this is probably what catalyzed my lifelong passion for the outdoors that is now expressed in my climate work. It took me a long time, but after I earned tenure I started shifting my emphasis toward environmental problems. On the research side, my students and I began studying some unusual enzymes from methanogens, the microorganisms that generate all the biologically derived methane on Earth. After moving from California to Portland, Oregon, we learned how to culture methanogens in our lab and eventually discovered a metabolic pathway that allows these cells to assimilate reduced forms of sulfur in anaerobic environments lacking oxygen. Are you involved with volunteer organizations active in the climate space? Outside the lab, I got very interested in the efforts of a small nonprofit law firm, the Environmental Defense Center, to hold the oil industry to account for damages caused by offshore oil and gas drilling in the Santa Barbara channel. Later, in Portland, my interests in this and other environmental issues led me into the formal study of environmental law and eventually also to work as a citizen advocate for a healthy climate. I volunteered for many years with the Citizens’ Climate Lobby (CCL), advocating for an economy-wide carbon tax, and more recently have engaged with other advocates in Oregon to help influence the state legislature to pass laws promoting renewable energy. What is the main focus of your book “From Knowledge to Power”? From Knowledge to Power (KP), was published in November  and is a comprehensive handbook covering climate science, policy, politics and citizen advocacy in the US. It’s written for laypersons who want to get involved in healthy climate advocacy and is also suitable as a text for adult education and university audiences. The book is much more detailed than other works on climate science for a general audience - but I became convinced, through my advocacy, that there is demand for a more rigorous treatment that helps advocates build a secure knowledge base, which they can use to be more effective in their work to influence government and business leaders. KP starts with a heavy emphasis on climate science and covers all the key issues on the energy balance, carbon cycle, models and projections, and impacts. Readers of Skeptical Science will be familiar with the main denialist arguments, and these are integrated (together with rebuttals) into the early science chapters. The book then moves into a short interlude describing energy transition roadmaps and a chapter on fossil fuels, which includes the politics of disinformation campaigns by fossil fuel companies. The last four chapters are on renewable energy technology and policy, interspersed with opportunities for advocacy. There’s also a dedicated chapter on advocacy with a nonpartisan focus, explaining how progressives and conservatives alike can find a home in the advocacy movement. Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  August  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables In this week's governmentNGO reports section, another rapid assessment by World Weather Attribution, an outfit dedicated to keeping us informed of the impacts of climate change on weather events happening around us right now. WWA's new report Climate change more than doubled the likelihood of extreme fire weather conditions in Eastern Canada finds: Climate change made the cumulative severity of Québec’s  fire season to the end of July around % more intense, and seasons of this severity at least seven times more likely to occur. Peak fire weather like that experienced this year is at least twice as likely, and the intensity has increased by about % due to human-induced climate change. Even for folks who don't care about others, making sure everybody is taken care of as we deal with the root cause of our burgeoning climate threat is a matter of plain old enlightened self-interest. Creating an angry crowd characterized and differentiated from ourselves by deprivation isn't smart— we can't ask the Romanovs but we can guess what they'd tell us about that. With concentrated reliance on prior research, Net-zero transitions for all? Considering applications in Asia by So-Young Lee and published in Sustainability Science lays out the the history and risks of transition left-behinds, painting a concerning picture but leaving us with a ray of hope founded in a reality created by better choices: As the only country to achieve net-zero so far, Bhutan’s invention of the Gross National Happiness Index is a timely reminder that putting people and societies at the heart of the climate narrative can generate positive outcomes for generations to come. Thinking in averages and means tends to hide important details of individual circumstances. Rapid increase in the risk of heat-related mortality, Lüthi et al., Nature Communications: Current research focuses largely on how heat mortality increases with mean global temperature rise, but it is unclear how much climate change will increase the frequency and severity of extreme summer seasons with high impact on human health. In this probabilistic analysis, we combined empirical heat-mortality relationships for  locations from  countries with climate model large ensemble data to identify probable past and future highly impactful summer seasons. Across most locations, heat mortality counts of a -in- year season in the climate of  would be expected once every ten to twenty years in the climate of . These return periods are projected to further shorten under warming levels of . °C and  °C, where heat-mortality extremes of the past climate will eventually become commonplace if no adaptation occurs. The effectiveness of moderating harmful online content by Phillipp Schneider and Marian-Andrei Rizolu publishing in PNAS finds that social network moderation efforts have a significant positive effect on limiting the what the authors term the "content half-life" of bunk and hate appearing online. With the hashtag "#climatescam" as one of two main test articles, the paper is close to Skeptical Science's home. In Earth's Future, Yesterday's High Tide Is Today's New Normal by Christopher Piecuch and Benjamin Hamlington makes a simple but thought-provoking point with broad implications: tidal datums employed for many purposes are not keeping up with events we've caused: Given the rapid pace of sea-level rise in the United States (Sweet et al., ), official definitions of tidal heights based on historical observations no longer correspond to the daily water levels typically experienced today. This presents legal and political challenges, but perhaps more basically it illustrates how fundamentally and quickly our collective experience of the coast has changed: coastal elevations that only decades ago were recognized as mean higher high water, inundated only acutely during storms or peak seasonal full- or new-moon tides, are now (or will soon be) experienced as mean sea level, underwater as often as not (Figure ). This has profound implications for how we live, work, and play by the sea, and provides a stark demonstration of how sea-level rise is redefining the American shore. From the "decarbonization" section, let's finish up with an excellent review article giving cause for some optimism: Wu et al. in Carbon Neutralization, with Cathode materials for calcium-ion batteries: Current status and prospects and introducing the notion of the "post-lithium-ion-battery era." The authors point out that lithium resources will be exhausted in a very few decades at the rate we're going (let alone being quite problematic in other ways), so a move to other much more abundant light metals is a welcome prospect. The authors lay out a course of solid progress.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects Contemporary oceanic radiocarbon response to ocean circulation changes, Pookkandy et al., Climate Dynamics Open Access pdf .s--- Dynamics of localized extreme heatwaves in the mid-latitude atmosphere: A conceptual examination, Rostami et al., Atmospheric Science Letters Open Access pdf .asl. Joint optimization of land carbon uptake and albedo can help achieve moderate instantaneous and long-term cooling effects, Graf et al., Communications Earth & Environment Open Access pdf .s--- Marine heatwave as a supercharger for the strongest typhoon in the East China Sea, Pun et al., npj Climate and Atmospheric Science Open Access pdf .s--- On the recent increase in Atlantic Ocean hurricane activity and influencing factors, Moharana & Swain, Natural Hazards .s--- Read more  comments How is climate change affecting China’s cropland? Posted on  August  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Carbon Brief by Wanyuan Song Chinese agriculture has not had an easy year. Official data shows that at least .m hectares (,km) or % of wheat land in China have been affected by a sustained spate of rains – with “agricultural challenges” set to continue throughout the rest of the year.” The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and World Bank both stress that further loss and damage is expected across China’s farming sector as global temperatures continue to rise. But what, specifically, is happening to China’s arable land? And how does China plan to minimise the negative impacts of climate change on its wider food system? In this Q&A, Carbon Brief looks at China’s cropland policies. What challenges does Chinese farming face under climate change? What impact will climate change have on China’s food security? How much arable land does China have? How will China balance food security with forestry and renewable energy? What challenges does Chinese farming face under climate change? In , China suffered from its worst heatwave and drought in six decades. The ministry of agriculture and rural affairs stated at a press conference last August that the agricultural sector was facing “growing risks” as a result of extreme weather and shifting planting conditions brought about by climate change. This summer, severe drought continued to affect China in June and July, while a torrent of floods brought on by typhoons followed in August. The heavy rains have destroyed corn and rice crops in north China, while in central China’s Henan province more than m tonnes of wheat were lost in June alone. Although the agriculture ministry insists the country has experienced a “summer harvest”, the summer’s grain output decreased .bn jin (.m tonnes) from last year’s total of m tonnes. However, the US department of agriculture predicts that  may not end up being a poor harvest year for China. Only sunflower seeds, barley and cotton are likely to see a reduction in production. The output of main crops, including corn, rice and wheat, would surpass the average output of the past five years. Read more  comments At a glance - How much is sea level rising? Posted on  August  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "How much is sea level rising?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance You'd think it would be obvious, wouldn't you? If ice (or snow) melts, you get water. Water flows downhill through gravity and collects wherever it can be retained. In areas that see regular winter snowfalls, the processes involved are familiar. Snow-capped mountains look photogenic but along comes the eventual thaw and the river levels rise sharply with all the meltwater. Now apply the same basic principles to glaciers and ice-caps. It should not come as a surprise that exactly the same thing happens and where that meltwater collects is ultimately the oceans. Note here that we're talking about land-based ice, not sea-ice: sea-ice is already part of the ocean so does not affect sea levels as it forms and melts every year. But melt enough land-ice and you get very significant change indeed. What do we mean by very significant? Well, let's look at the transition out of the last ice-age that dominated the last , years. It began with ice-caps over parts of Europe and North America and ended not so long ago with much of that ice gone but with sea levels having risen by more than  metres. If that's not significant, what is? There's not enough ice left on Earth to raise sea levels by that whopping amount now, but there is enough to raise the oceans by more than  metres. Over what sort of time-frame? Well, we know that the current rate of sea level rise is some . mm a year, or nearly an inch and a half per decade. A lot of that is due to the expansion of the oceans - as things are warmed up they expand. But the rate is accelerating. How fast do we think it can get? We do have the past to consider: during the glacial meltdown of the past , years, there was a period ominously named Meltwater Pulse A that began some , years ago. During this enhanced period of melting, sea levels rose by between  and  metres in about – years. That's roughly – mm per year or - inches a decade. Could such drastic rates of sea level rise happen again? Probably not but nevertheless it shows what is possible as ice-sheets collapse in a warming world. But even if sea level rise stays at its current rate (it won't), that's getting on for a two-metre increase over the coming  years and a one-half to one-metre increase over the next  years. Now go anywhere affected by tides and think about all the communities of people that live and work along the shore. Pick the biggest spring tides, take a look at where they reach at high water, maybe watch the waves and surge when a storm occurs, then imagine an extra two metres of water on top of that. And try to imagine being the decision-makers in the coming decades and centuries, who will have to work out what best to do. What would you think of the people all those years ago, who went around pretending this was not happening? Not favourably, for sure - because of such behaviour, that is how history will remember them. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments Eastern Canada wildfires: Climate change doubled likelihood of ‘extreme fire weather’ Posted on  August  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Carbon Brief by Ayesha Tandon The unusually hot and dry weather that drove record-breaking wildfires in eastern Canada was made at least two times more likely by human-caused climate change, according to a new rapid attribution study. Canada is experiencing its most severe wildfire season in recorded history this year. Wildfires have burned more than m hectares ( acres) of land, forcing thousands of people to evacuate and sending up billowing plumes of smoke that have reached as far as New York. Around % of Canada’s total forest area has burned this year. The wildfires have already doubled the previous records for burned area and carbon emissions, and the wildfire season is not over yet. There are more than , active fires nationwide, two-thirds of which are classed as out of control. “The word ‘unprecedented’ doesn’t do justice to the severity of the wildfires in Canada this year,” an author on the study warns. He adds that “from a scientific perspective, the doubling of the previous burned area record is shocking”. The “unusually” hot and dry weather conditions were important drivers of the unprecedented wildfires, the World Weather Attribution service finds. The “peak fire weather” seen in eastern Canada over May-July this year was at least two times more likely and % more intense due to human-induced climate change, the study finds. It warns that as the climate warms, “fire-prone weather” will become more likely. Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  August  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Aug ,  thru Sat, Aug , . Story of the Week Scientific journal retracts article that claimed no evidence of climate crisis Publisher Springer Nature says  article ‘not supported by available evidence’ as editors launch investigation One of the world’s biggest scientific publishers has retracted a journal article that claimed to have found no evidence of a climate crisis. Springer Nature said it had retracted the article, by four Italian physicists, after an internal investigation found the conclusions were “not supported by available evidence or data provided by the authors”. Climate sceptic groups widely publicised the article, which appeared in the European Physical Journal Plus in January  – a journal not known for publishing climate change science. Nine months later the article was reported uncritically in a page one story in the Australian newspaper and promoted in two segments on Sky News Australia – a channel that has been described as a global hub for climate science misinformation. The segments were viewed more than , times on YouTube. The article claimed to have analysed data to find no trend in rainfall extremes, floods, droughts and food productivity. “In conclusion on the basis of observational data, the climate crisis that, according to many sources, we are experiencing today, is not evident yet,” the article said. Several climate scientists told the Guardian and later the news agency AFP that the article had misrepresented some scientific articles, was “selective and biased” and had “cherrypicked” information. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on The Guardian website. Scientific journal retracts article that claimed no evidence of climate crisis Publisher Springer Nature says  article ‘not supported by available evidence’ as editors launch investigation by Graham Readfearn, Environment, The Guardian, Aug ,  Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  August  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Publication accident report There are not  hours in a day and so we're unable to cover all scientific journals, instead must restrict surveillance to those most likely to include climate-relevant results. Thus our weekly compendium did not include the paper "A critical assessment of extreme events trends in times of global warming," published in Springer-Nature's European Physical Journal Plus back in January of  and authored by Alimonti et al. The paper has just been retracted, with its residual value now lying in (re)learning lessons about how the peer review process can and does sometimes fail, and how to avoid such harm. Although the main failure modes in play with this bobble are not new and thus a bit irritating to report, as with any accident investigation the worth of retrospection isn't in blame-casting but rather "see and avoid" in the future. How did we get here, and how do we steer around such trouble? It's a lot about recognizing division of "pilot workload, applying "cockpit resource management," and disciplined self-assessment of skills. When those systems fail, factors normally not problematic may stack up and turn into a harmful accident. A sign of trouble with this work that should have been identified early: the author team were practicing outside of their normal individual disciplines. While not itself a reason to summarily desk-reject a submission, this should have alerted editors and then appropriately selected reviewers to the need for especially careful attention to the authors' methods, analysis and conclusions. But this brings us to a more glaring problem: the stable of reviewers for European Physical Journal Plus wasn't actually suited for assessing and critiquing this paper. Yet for whatever reason neither the journal's editorial team nor the reviewers chose to admit this and send the paper looking elsewhere for better, suitably competent treatment. This latter failure might be termed the "root cause" of the ensuing publication accident. Another clue of severe turbulence ahead could have been missed by anybody: two authors were signatories to the so-called "World Climate Declaration," a sort of OISM Petition on steroids designed to create an aura of authority while presenting an entirely fictitious picture of the actual state of Earth's climate as it's affected by human activities. Easy to miss, but a clear indication of motivated reasoning likely in play given the declaration's alienation from scientific consensus and consilience on basic functioning of Earth's climate. Barreling through all safety barriers the paper was accepted for publication, setting the stage for a hearty helping of humiliation for journal and authors alike— and for more general delusion of the public mind. Meanwhile, climate contrarians live in an environment of starvation when it comes to supporting work published in legitimate journals; Alimonti et al. was eagerly devoured in certain circles when it duly appeared in print, gaining thereby a smidgeon of notoriety. As a side note, one can't help but remark the astoundingly specialized diet of deniers. Presented with a dish of publications including literally thousands of nuggets of information kibble per year, they reliably sort and reject everything that doesn't comport with prior beliefs, seize on and gobble down the single nibble that tastes "right." It's a failing we all share but especially prominent here. Now following a familiar trajectory (horse out of the barn), thanks to grateful climate "skeptics" boosting its profile the paper attracted attention of domain experts, essentially the reviewers who ideally should have been those assigned the review task prior to publication. Belatedly doing what might better have come before, the journal conducted a more intensive review of the work. The authors were offered an opportunity to salvage their claims but failed to rise to the occasion. So, the paper is now retracted by European Physical Journal Plus and everybody involved ends up a bit bruised and battered. May their pain not be wasted. Notably, whatever state of misinformation will have been created by the paper's circulation outside of the academic sphere will be essentially impossible to fully remedy. The publication process crash has created a little crater in our overall betterment. In remarks to Agence France-Presse, Stefan Rahmstorf of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research noted that targeting of a vulnerable journal is "a common avenue taken by 'climate skeptics' in order to avoid peer review by real experts in the field." Embarrassment for all is the result but we can be consoled that while lamentably slow and working elliptically, "the system worked." And we can thank Alimonti et al. for providing a valuable skills-building opportunity for the victim journal. There's now less excuse for such a pratfall. We've seen this evolution before— there's no need to repeat it.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects Convective Self-Aggregation Occurs Without Radiative Feedbacks in Warm Climates, Yao & Yang Yang, Geophysical Research Letters Open Access pdf .gl Nonlinearity of the cloud response postpones climate penalty of mitigating air pollution in polluted regions, Jia & Quaas, Nature Climate Change Open Access pdf .s--- Role of Horizontal Heat Advection in Arctic Surface Warming During Early Spring, Dai, Geophysical Research Letters Open Access pdf .gl Unexpected cooling February during global-warming slowdown: Focusing on the mid–high latitudes of Eurasia, Chen et al., Atmospheric Research .j.atmosres.. Observations of climate change, effects Changes of the streamflow of northern river basins of Siberia and their teleconnections to climate patterns, Zhang et al., International Journal of Climatology Open Access pdf .joc. Read more  comments ClimateAdam: The Vlog Brothers on geoengineering Posted on  August  by Guest Author This video includes conclusions of the creator climate scientist Dr. Adam Levy. It is presented to our readers as an informed perspective. Please see video description for references (if any). On his latest video for the Vlog Brothers, Hank Green spoke about the accidental experiment that cleaning up ship fuel has carried out on the climate, in a video titled "The Biggest Science Story of the Week". Among other things, Hank argues that this could be a crucial opportunity to learn about geoengineering. Geoengineering - according to this Vlog Brother - could be a "giant step forward". So what could geoengineering actually achieve to combat climate change? And why are many climate scientists far more skeptical than Hank lets on? Huge thanks to Miriam for her contribution. Check out her channel here: @zenturo. Support ClimateAdam on patreon: https:patreon.comclimateadam Read more  comments The Consensus Project Website THE ESCALATOR (free to republish) © Copyright  John Cook Home | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us 
 Climate Home News About us Mission, vision and values The team Advisory board Supporters Anonymous sources policy Contact us Write for us Partner with us Make a complaint Menu Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Latest climate change news EU uses pollution tax funds to back Romanian gas pipeline  September  News The European Union is using taxes on pollution to fund a gas pipeline in Romania, claiming it will reduce emissions compared to coal Comment Leaders must listen to the people and end fossil fuels  September  Comment Masses of people will take to the streets in  events around the world this weekend, to call for a phaseout of coal, oil and gas News Overshoot Commission calls for research into solar geoengineering  September  News Dimming the sun could “complement” emissions cuts, says panel of leaders, while acknowledging concerns about the risks Comment Debt relief must break dependence on fossil fuel exports  September  Comment There is a vicious cycle between fossil fuel reliance and debt, which helps explain why so many oil exporters are heavily indebted Analysis Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations  September  Analysis The country is not moving away from coal yet, doesn’t want to hand rich nations a win and thinks the JETP terms aren’t good enough News Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing  September  News Small island states have asked the world’s maritime tribunal to clarify state obligations on climate change, which could be influential for other courts. Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’  September  Comment We need to recognise the diversity of ways climate impacts influence people’s movements, not reduce them to one label G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels  September  News The world’s largest economies agreed to push for a tripling of renewable energy capacity by , but made no progress on oil and gas phaseout Latest news Become a CHN sponsor Become a CHN sponsor Sponsored content How can we create the net zero buildings of tomorrow?  September  SME Climate Hub drives accountability with new reporting tool  July  Sustainable fishing offers lifeline to communities hit by climate crisis  July  Australia can leverage efficiency and electrification to power a net-zero future  July  Disaster risk reduction needs to sit at the heart of climate adaptation  June  Most popular G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’ A wolf in sheep’s clothing: why Africa should shun carbon markets Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations Mexico’s ruling party picks climate scientist for presidential run Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing UAE pitches itself as Africa’s carbon credits leader Climate Home News seeks pitches on renewable energy supply chain Population boom driving Philippines’ climate vulnerability Southeast Asia must not let Japan hijack its energy transition Tweets by @ClimateHome Comment Identifying loss and damage is tough – we need a pragmatic but science-based approach  July  It’s often hard to judge whether a drought is weather-related or climate related and whether people are displaced by the drought or conflicts Morocco’s centuries-old irrigation system under threat from climate change  June  As Morocco faces increasingly extreme temperatures, indigenous communities in the country’s southeast suffer the brunt of the climate crisis Senegal shows African countries are not passive beneficiaries of climate finance  June  While drawing up their renewables deal with wealthy countries, Senegalese government, civil society, business and researchers had their say Multilateral banks’ investments in industrial livestock undermine their Paris climate commitments  June  Public money should stop flowing towards the expansion of animal agriculture, which is responsible for a fifth of the world’s emissions Republicans’ anti-ESG attack may be silencing insurers, but it isn’t changing their pro-climate business decisions  June  Republicans are pressuring insurers out of climate coalitions but won’t change their pro-climate business decisions How a local victory against petrochemicals can spur global action on plastics  June  The Banner sisters fought for the preservation of land in America’s ‘Cancer Alley’. They are now in Paris to demand a global cap on plastic production. G leaders must fulfil their promise to stop funding fossil fuels  May  Rich nations’ leaders need to uphold their commitment to a clean and sustainable energy future. What’s at stake for climate at the World Bank’s spring meeting?  April  The World Bank controls tens of billions of dollars which can make a real difference in the fight against climate change. A coalition of nations is pushing for green reforms. Comment Section × The climate crisis - and how we confront it - is THE story of our lifetimes. At Climate Home News, we believe journalism can make a difference. Our mission is to produce original reporting that informs, engages and inspires action. This takes time and expertise. Support our work today with a donation or by subscribing to our daily newsletter for exclusive extra content. Subscribe About us Contact us ©  Climate Home News Ltd. All rights reserved. Privacy policyclick here Want our celebrated digest of weekly news straight to your inbox? Sign up to Climate Weekly, plus you'll get breaking news, investigations and bulletins from key events. Newsletter Signup Subscribe or I'm signed up Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store andor access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent 
 Climate : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expandcollapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expandcollapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expandcollapse submenu for Music Hip-Hop  Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expandcollapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured Rough Translation Louder Than A Riot It's Been a Minute Life Kit More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop Hip-Hop  Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Organization NPR Network Support Careers Connect Press Ethics Climate NPR's full coverage of climate change and related issues. Climate Subscribe to NPR's Up First Email Search and rescue operations are underway in the region affected by floods due to Storm Daniel in Derna, Libya, Sept. . Hamza Al AhmarAnadolu Agency via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Hamza Al AhmarAnadolu Agency via Getty Images World Survivors of Libya's deadly floods describe catastrophic scenes and tragic losses September ,  • "They have seen death, not just in their families but within themselves as well," a Libyan doctor tells NPR. "Their souls are crushed, their hope is lost. How can you come back from such a thing?" Rich Snyder, who retired as the fire marshal of Sierra Madre, Calif., now works for Allied Disaster Defense, a California company that hardens homes against wildfire. One strategy is covering air vents with ember-blocking mesh. Liz BakerNPR hide caption toggle caption Liz BakerNPR Business Preparing homes for wildfires is big business that's only getting started September ,  • Climate change, technological leaps, panicked insurers, the shifting sense of responsibility: All are powering the still-nascent, but fast-growing industry of preparing homes for wildfires. Preparing homes for wildfires is big business that's only getting started Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> A couple walks in a flooded Saint Mark's Square during high waters on Nov. , , in Venice, Italy. Marco SecchiGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Marco SecchiGetty Images Venice won't be listed as one of the world's most endangered sites September ,  • UNESCO, the United Nations body that designates and protects World Heritage sites, says it will continue to monitor the famed Italian city's issues, including climate change and over-tourism. Internal Exxon documents obtained by The Wall Street Journal span Rex Tillerson's tenure as the company's chief executive from  until . Brian HarkinGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Brian HarkinGetty Images Exxon minimized climate change internally after conceding that fossil fuels cause it September ,  • The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that as recently as , Exxon executives were privately pushing back on the idea that humans need to cut their use of oil and gas to limit global warming. A volunteer takes a break on the rubble of a building in a flash flood-damaged area in Derna on September , . The Libyan Red Crescent said Thursday that more than , were killed in the flood and another , were still missing. Abdullah DomaAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Abdullah DomaAFP via Getty Images Africa Death toll soars to , from flooding in Libyan coastal city of Derna September ,  • Another , are reported missing from flooding caused by Mediterranean storm Daniel, the Libyan Red Crescent says. The city of Derna, Libya on Wednesday, Sept. , . Floods from extreme rain killed thousands of people and washed entire neighborhoods into the sea. Muhammad J. ElalwanyAP hide caption toggle caption Muhammad J. ElalwanyAP Climate change exacerbates deadly floods worldwide September ,  • Climate change makes deadly floods, like what happened in Libya, more likely. Floods in China, Greece and Brazil in recent weeks underscore the growing danger. Threatened by rising sea levels, San Francisco is considering drastic measures to save its historic shoreline. Above, the Ferry Building pictured in . Anthony JacobsAP Images for T-Mobile hide caption toggle caption Anthony JacobsAP Images for T-Mobile San Francisco considers lifting the Ferry Building by  feet to save it from the sea September ,  • The Ferry Building has been a beacon to incoming ferry riders since the late s. Threatened by rising sea levels, the waterfront city is considering drastic measures to save its historic shoreline. San Francisco considers lifting the Ferry Building by  feet to save it from the sea Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript A combination image of satellite photos shows an area before and after a powerful storm and floods hit the country, in Derna, Libya, on Sept.  (top) and Sept. . EyePress NewsEYEPRESS via Reuters Connect hide caption toggle caption EyePress NewsEYEPRESS via Reuters Connect World More than , have been found dead after Libya floods September ,  • In the coastal city of Derna, dams broke, sending a torrent of water that submerged whole neighborhoods. Rescue efforts are complicated by the fact that Libya is divided between rival governments. The flooded St. Mark's Square on Nov. , , in Venice, two days after the city suffered a high tide. Filippo MonteforteAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Filippo MonteforteAFP via Getty Images Venice may be put on the endangered list, thanks to human-created climate change September ,  • The impacts of climate change including related disasters, such as wildfires and sea level rise, are increasingly raising a question about how best to save cultural heritage. Venice may be put on the endangered list, thanks to human-created climate change Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript People check an area damaged by flash floods in Derna, eastern Libya, on Monday. AFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption AFP via Getty Images Middle East Libya fears a spiraling death toll from powerful storm floods September ,  • At least hundreds of people have died and thousands are feared missing in eastern Libya after Storm Daniel swept in, destroying dams and unleashing a torrent of muddy water that carried homes away. Libya fears a spiraling death toll from powerful storm floods Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Hurricane Lee is expected to restrengthen in the coming days, the National Hurricane Center said Sunday. National Oceanic and Atmospheric AssociationScreenshot by NPR hide caption toggle caption National Oceanic and Atmospheric AssociationScreenshot by NPR Weather Hurricane Lee is forecast to push dangerous surf along the East Coast September ,  • The powerful Category  storm is restrengthening as it moves northwest, but currently poses no immediate threat to people on land, according to the National Hurricane Center. Clouds surround downtown Phoenix at sunset on July , . Matt YorkAP hide caption toggle caption Matt YorkAP End may be in sight for Phoenix's historic heat wave of -degree-plus weather September ,  • On Sunday, it was the th day this year that the official reading at Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport hit  degrees. But the end may finally be in sight for residents of Arizona's largest city. Emissions from burning fossil fuels aren't falling fast enough to stop dangerous levels of warming, a U.N. report warns. Christopher FurlongGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Christopher FurlongGetty Images The world is still falling short on limiting climate change, according to U.N. report September ,  • The outlook for climate change is better now than a few years ago, but countries have a long way to go to avoid dangerous climate impacts, according to a new report. According to he U.S. Fish and Wildlife service, about % of the species that have gotten protection from the landmark law – like the Key Deer — have avoided extinction. Ryan KellmanNPR hide caption toggle caption Ryan KellmanNPR Consider This from NPR Climate Change is Making It Difficult to Protect Endangered Species September ,  • The Endangered Species Act turns  this year. Climate Change is Making It Difficult to Protect Endangered Species Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Millions of Americans receive little or no information about flood risk before they buy a house or sign a lease, leading families to put their safety, belongings and financial security in harm's way. New rules in four states aim to address the problem. Ryan KellmanNPR hide caption toggle caption Ryan KellmanNPR Residents of four states will get more information about flood risk to their homes September ,  • Four states are strengthening rules that require home sellers and landlords to disclose information about whether a home has flooded in the past, or is likely to flood in the future. Residents of four states will get more information about flood risk to their homes Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Kaitlin Brito for NPR Education Extreme heat is cutting into recess for kids. Experts say that's a problem September ,  • A heat wave at the start of the school year has educators scrambling to keep kids cool and safe. Extreme heat is cutting into recess for kids. Experts say that's a problem Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Attendees look at a double rainbow over flooding on a desert plain on Sept. , after heavy rains turned the annual Burning Man festival site in Nevada's Black Rock Desert into a mud pit. Julie JammotAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Julie JammotAFP via Getty Images Climate activists protested at Burning Man. Then the climate itself crashed the party September ,  • Burners were forced to endure hours of torrential rains before tens of thousands bailed on the festival. Scientists warn that such large bursts of showers are a result of a warming planet. Commuters make their way down a smoggy road in Lahore, Pakistan in . Extreme heat waves make air pollution, like smog, worse. Arif AliAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Arif AliAFP via Getty Images Extreme heat makes air quality worse–that's bad for health September ,  • Air quality around the world suffered in  because of climate-induced extreme heat, according to a new report from the World Meteorological Association. An oil pumpjack at work in the Permian Basin of West Texas. Joe RaedleGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Joe RaedleGetty Images Consider This from NPR When Big Oil Gets In The Carbon Removal Game, Who Wins? September ,  • Giant machines sucking carbon dioxide out of the air to fight climate change sounds like science fiction, but it's close to becoming a reality, with billions of dollars of support from the U.S. government. When Big Oil Gets In The Carbon Removal Game, Who Wins? Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript In this undated file photo provided by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, caribou from the Porcupine caribou herd migrate onto the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in northeast Alaska. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service via AP hide caption toggle caption U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service via AP Environment Biden ends drilling in ANWR, sparking criticism, as Willow Project moves forward September ,  • The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is home to dozens of species — and to an ongoing political fight over oil and gas. Now, the Biden administration is hoping ending oil and gas leases will be a win. The Great Salt Lake this winter, before spring runoff increased its elevation Kirk SieglerNPR hide caption toggle caption Kirk SieglerNPR Environment Green groups sue, say farmers are drying up Great Salt Lake September ,  • Environmental groups have filed suit against the state of Utah arguing leaders aren't doing enough to prevent the state's namesake Great Salt Lake from drying up. Green groups sue, say farmers are drying up Great Salt Lake Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Police officers check a house as residents wade through a flooded street after floods caused by a cyclone in Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul state, Brazil, Monday. Diogo ZanattaFutura PressAP hide caption toggle caption Diogo ZanattaFutura PressAP Latin America A cyclone has killed over  people in Brazil, with more flooding expected September ,  • The southern Brazilian states of Rio Grande do Sul and neighboring Santa Catarina are reeling after a devastating cyclone killed  people and displaced thousands. As oceans get hotter, scientists are looking for ways to safeguard coral species so they can be used to restore reefs in the future. Donald MiralleGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Donald MiralleGetty Images One way to save coral reefs? Deep freeze them for the future September ,  • As oceans get hotter, coral reefs are suffering. Scientists are working on ways to preserve coral by freezing and then reviving them to restore reefs someday. A man cools off at a temporary misting station deployed by the city in the Downtown Eastside due to a heat wave, in Vancouver, British Columbia, Aug. , . DARRYL DYCKAP hide caption toggle caption DARRYL DYCKAP This summer was the hottest on record across the Northern Hemisphere, the U.N. says September ,  • The world's oceans were the hottest ever recorded, while Antarctica continued to set records for low amounts of sea ice, the World Meteorological Organization said. More from Climate Load more stories Browse archive or search npr.org Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook  Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsor 
 News | World Meteorological Organization Skip to main content World Meteorological Organization Weather · Climate · Water Toggle navigation 简体中文EnglishFrançaisРусскийEspañol Go Our mandate What we do Weather How we do it Public-Private Engagement (PPE) ocp innovation webinar Space borne Precipitation Measurements and Application WMO and HMEI Information Day WMO Innovation Seminar - Microsoft and the UN Sustainable Development Goals Climate Focus areas Water Programmes Projects Resources Bulletin MeteoWorld Library Gender Equality Education and training Standards and Recommended Practices The WMO Building  Conference Centre Language resources World Meteorological Day United in Science Coronavirus (COVID-) Media Events About us Who we are Vision, Mission, Strategic Planning Members Governance The Secretariat Employment Awards Procurement Finance and Accountability Related links FAQs Contact us Community Platform Reform Search form Search Home Media News News Main News Press Release News from Members Multimedia Contact us FqIWWgAAKTB.jpeg Libya floods show need for multi-hazard early warnings, unified response News Early Warnings Disasters Publish Date:  September  The tragedy in Libya highlights the devastating and cascading consequences of extreme weather on fragile states and shows the need for a multi-hazard early warnings which embrace all levels of government and society, said WMO Secretary-General Prof. Petteri Taalas. thumbnail_Photo.jpeg Storm Daniel leads to extreme rain and floods in Mediterranean, heavy loss of life in Libya News Floods Disasters Early Warnings Publish Date:  September  Extreme rainfall from a storm system called Storm Daniel has hit parts of the Mediterranean, causing devastating flooding and loss of life in Libya, the worst affected country, as well as in Greece, Turkey and Bulgaria. thumbnails.jpg Window to reach climate goals ‘rapidly closing’ News Climate change Publish Date:  September  The world is not on track to meet the long-term goals set out in the Paris Agreement for limiting global temperature rise, according to a new report from the UN Framework for Climate Change (UNFCCC). Celeste_Saulo_SG_.png American Meteorological Society honors Celeste Saulo News WMO Meteorology Publish Date:  September  World Meteorological Organization Secretary-General-elect, Prof. Celeste Saulo, has been named an Honorary Member of the American Meteorological Society (AMS) – a prestigious award which recognizes outstanding individuals and organizations in the weather, water, and climate community. _e_k.jpeg Scientists assess the impacts of a warming ocean News Oceans Climate change Publish Date:  September  With global average sea surface temperatures at record highs, scientists associated with the WMO co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme have made a collective assessment of recent global trends and what may be expected in the future. This includes an observed basin-wide warming of the ocean and an increase in marine heatwaves. Show more Follow WMO Discover Events News Bookstore Projects Bulletin MeteoWorld Learn Visit the Library Youth Corner WMO Governance Partnerships Contact us Procurement Privacy policy Report fraud, corruption or abuse About us Disclaimer Copyright Sitemap ©  World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
 Climate Home News About us Mission, vision and values The team Advisory board Supporters Anonymous sources policy Contact us Write for us Partner with us Make a complaint Menu Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Latest climate change news EU uses pollution tax funds to back Romanian gas pipeline  September  News The European Union is using taxes on pollution to fund a gas pipeline in Romania, claiming it will reduce emissions compared to coal Comment Leaders must listen to the people and end fossil fuels  September  Comment Masses of people will take to the streets in  events around the world this weekend, to call for a phaseout of coal, oil and gas News Overshoot Commission calls for research into solar geoengineering  September  News Dimming the sun could “complement” emissions cuts, says panel of leaders, while acknowledging concerns about the risks Comment Debt relief must break dependence on fossil fuel exports  September  Comment There is a vicious cycle between fossil fuel reliance and debt, which helps explain why so many oil exporters are heavily indebted Analysis Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations  September  Analysis The country is not moving away from coal yet, doesn’t want to hand rich nations a win and thinks the JETP terms aren’t good enough News Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing  September  News Small island states have asked the world’s maritime tribunal to clarify state obligations on climate change, which could be influential for other courts. Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’  September  Comment We need to recognise the diversity of ways climate impacts influence people’s movements, not reduce them to one label G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels  September  News The world’s largest economies agreed to push for a tripling of renewable energy capacity by , but made no progress on oil and gas phaseout Latest news Become a CHN sponsor Become a CHN sponsor Sponsored content How can we create the net zero buildings of tomorrow?  September  SME Climate Hub drives accountability with new reporting tool  July  Sustainable fishing offers lifeline to communities hit by climate crisis  July  Australia can leverage efficiency and electrification to power a net-zero future  July  Disaster risk reduction needs to sit at the heart of climate adaptation  June  Most popular G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’ A wolf in sheep’s clothing: why Africa should shun carbon markets Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations Mexico’s ruling party picks climate scientist for presidential run Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing UAE pitches itself as Africa’s carbon credits leader Climate Home News seeks pitches on renewable energy supply chain Population boom driving Philippines’ climate vulnerability Southeast Asia must not let Japan hijack its energy transition Tweets by @ClimateHome Comment Identifying loss and damage is tough – we need a pragmatic but science-based approach  July  It’s often hard to judge whether a drought is weather-related or climate related and whether people are displaced by the drought or conflicts Morocco’s centuries-old irrigation system under threat from climate change  June  As Morocco faces increasingly extreme temperatures, indigenous communities in the country’s southeast suffer the brunt of the climate crisis Senegal shows African countries are not passive beneficiaries of climate finance  June  While drawing up their renewables deal with wealthy countries, Senegalese government, civil society, business and researchers had their say Multilateral banks’ investments in industrial livestock undermine their Paris climate commitments  June  Public money should stop flowing towards the expansion of animal agriculture, which is responsible for a fifth of the world’s emissions Republicans’ anti-ESG attack may be silencing insurers, but it isn’t changing their pro-climate business decisions  June  Republicans are pressuring insurers out of climate coalitions but won’t change their pro-climate business decisions How a local victory against petrochemicals can spur global action on plastics  June  The Banner sisters fought for the preservation of land in America’s ‘Cancer Alley’. They are now in Paris to demand a global cap on plastic production. G leaders must fulfil their promise to stop funding fossil fuels  May  Rich nations’ leaders need to uphold their commitment to a clean and sustainable energy future. What’s at stake for climate at the World Bank’s spring meeting?  April  The World Bank controls tens of billions of dollars which can make a real difference in the fight against climate change. A coalition of nations is pushing for green reforms. Comment Section × The climate crisis - and how we confront it - is THE story of our lifetimes. At Climate Home News, we believe journalism can make a difference. Our mission is to produce original reporting that informs, engages and inspires action. This takes time and expertise. Support our work today with a donation or by subscribing to our daily newsletter for exclusive extra content. Subscribe About us Contact us ©  Climate Home News Ltd. All rights reserved. Privacy policyclick here Want our celebrated digest of weekly news straight to your inbox? Sign up to Climate Weekly, plus you'll get breaking news, investigations and bulletins from key events. Newsletter Signup Subscribe or I'm signed up Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store andor access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent 
 Climate Group Skip to main content Search About us Areas of Focus Back Key areas Energy Transport Built environment Industry Food Major programmes Climate Week NYC Showcasing amazing climate action ConcreteZero Creating a market for net zero concrete EP A growing group of energy-smart companies committed to improving their energy efficiency. EV Making light-duty electric transport the new normal by  RE The world’s most influential companies, committed to % renewable power EV+ Unlocking a revolution in zero-emission trucking and other heavy-duty vehicles RouteZero Speeding up the shift to zero emission vehicles for COP SteelZero Building demand for net zero steel Under Coalition Driving climate action in states and regions News Events Join us Under Coalition Support us Support us Driving climate action. fast Our mission is to drive climate action. Fast. Our goal is a world of net zero carbon emissions by , with greater prosperity for all. We focus on systems with the highest emissions and where our networks - both governments and businesses - have the greatest opportunity to drive change. We do this by building large and influential networks and holding organisations accountable, turning their commitments into action. We share what we achieve together to show more organisations what they could do. Our work Our mission and goals Our news Our latest stories Our latest stories See more stories Press release th September JSW Steel, IKEA and Flipkart to pilot electric trucks as part of Climate Group’s EV+ initiative Press release th August Major Indian, global businesses urge G leaders to support a .-degree aligned just, clean energy transition News nd August Challenges EP members are facing and our work to tackle them Get in touch If you've got a question about one of our initiatives, becoming a member or anything else, our teams are here to help, so please get in touch. Get in touch Support us Board of Trustees Contact Our team Careers Media contacts Newsletter Membership Hub LinkedIn  Facebook  ©  Climate Group. Company Registration: . Charity Reg: . The Climate Group, Inc is also a US-based (c) with EIN -. Modern Slavery Statement Privacy Policy Terms of Service 
 The Climate Reality Project Skip to main content JOIN OUR WEST AFRICA CLIMATE REALITY LEADERSHIP TRAINING APPLY TODAY >> Main Menu Close Sign Up About Us Take Action Our Work JOIN A TRAINING Donate search JOIN A TRAINING Donate At The Climate Reality Project, our global network of . million is working to build a just and sustainable true net-zero future. Join us. Get the tools, training, and network to help stop global warming and build a net-zero future for the Earth. Your Email Address I'm In! Hidden link for modal How We Get to True Net-Zero We train and mobilize people worldwide with four global campaigns to accelerate climate action this decade and help us reach true net-zero by  – the point where global warming can stop in as little as three-to-five years and the Earth begins to heal. Reducing Emissions Working to build a clean energy future by cutting emissions and opposing new fossil fuel infrastructure. LEARN MORE → Calling out Greenwashing Exposing the lies fossil fuel companies tell and countering with the truth about the energy transition we need. LEARN MORE → Financing a Just Transition Mobilizing global finance to build thriving clean energy economies. LEARN MORE → Strengthening International Cooperation on Climate Fighting to keep the Paris Agreement strong, hold governments to their commitments, and reform the COP process. LEARN MORE → Train with Al Gore Join the Climate Reality Leadership Corps by attending a multi-day training with former US Vice President Al Gore and leading scientists and experts and get the tools, know-how, and network to make a difference on climate. LEARN MORE → Take Action Now Join our Training in West Africa→ Urge new World Bank President Ajay Banga to take climate action→ Learn More About The Climate Crisis→ Take the Electrification Pledge→ Climate Reality in Action July ,  When We Are Taking Care of Our Environment, We Are Actually Taking Care of Ourselves July ,  Climate Reality New York Coalition Helps Pass Landmark Building Electrification Legislation July ,  Fighting Fossil Fuels – and Winning – in the Susquehanna Valley July ,  Climate Reality Central Minnesota Chapter Helps Pass Green Bank Legislation  th Street NW Suite  Washington, DC  Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Make an Impact Join a Training Join a Chapter Get Updates Our Climate Blog Articles Stories Videos About Us Our Mission Climate and Environmental Justice Climate Justice For All Project Grants Chapters Branches Strategic Partnerships Who We Are Work With Us Donate Press Reality Hub OUR INITIATIVES Climate Reality Leadership Corps % Committed Our Climate Moment  Hours of Reality Public Webinars Campus Corps 
 Climate | Initiatives | WWF Skip to Main Content WWF Toggle Nav Donate Adopt World Wildlife Fund Toggle Nav Search Submit Search Donate Toggle Donate button Make a Donation Donate in Someone's Name Renew your Membership Join as a Partner in Conservation Respond to our TV Ad See Other Ways to Support Adopt Toggle Adopt button Adoptions Apparel More Gifts Toggle Our Work Dropdown Links Learn more about our impact What we care about People Places Species Climate crisis Sustainability How we work Public policy Science Business Wildlife conservation About WWF WWF works to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and wildlife, collaborating with partners from local to global levels in nearly  countries. Learn more about our impact Toggle Get involved Dropdown Links See all ways to get involved Take action Fundraise Give Send ecards Get email Educational resources Leave a legacy gift Travel with us Connect with us Facebook   YouTube See all ways to get involved Toggle About us Dropdown Links Contact Mission and values Who we are History Leadership Experts Stories and updates World Wildlife Magazine Newsroom Financials Careers Contact Search Search Submit Search Donate Toggle Donate button Make a Donation Donate in Someone's Name Renew your Membership Join as a Partner in Conservation Respond to our TV Ad See Other Ways to Support Adopt Toggle Adopt button Adoptions Apparel More Gifts Our Work Our Work Climate Top Overview Why It Matters What WWF is Doing How You Can Help Donate Climate Create a climate-resilient and zero-carbon world, powered by renewable energy Overview People around the world are calling on leaders to take action on climate change. Our world is changing faster than anyone predicted. Already, freshwater supplies are shrinking, agricultural yields are dropping, our forests are burning, and rising oceans are more acidic—all, in part, due to a warming climate. As our natural world changes around us, so does our way of life. Coastal home values drop as insurance premiums rise; drought reduces feed for American farmers’ cattle and water for their crops; more pollen and dust in the air aggravates asthma and allergies in kids and adults alike. At WWF, we believe we can fight this consequential threat and build a safer, healthier and more resilient future for people and nature. We must rethink the way we produce and consume energy, food, and water; protect the world’s forests; and help people prepare for a changing world. Achieving this future will require action by everyone, and we are already well on our way. People are using their collective voices to demand change. Businesses are making investments in clean energy, already creating local jobs and stronger economies. Communities are redesigning their roads, buildings, airports, and railroads to make them climate resilient. And nations around the world are committed to delivering on a landmark global plan to curb climate change, known as the Paris Agreement. For decades, WWF has engaged with millions of Americans, leading businesses, and government leaders to prepare for inevitable change and reduce the emissions that drive climate change. Tweet Browse Photos & Videos h A climate high, a climate low, and our climate future In these strange days of summer, we witnessed an extreme climate high and an extreme climate low. Both have significant implications for the planet’s health and for confronting the climate crisis moving forward. Continue Reading h More Stories h Why It Matters Wildlife Climate change is already having a significant impact on wild animals around the globe. Changes in climate are altering the timing of life cycles, causing species to shift where they live, and in some cases even leading to extinction. We can help species adapt to our changing world by ensuring that our own responses to climate change factor in the health and wellbeing of the habitat and resources on which they depend. Front Line Communities Climate change imposes heavy burdens on those living nearest to floodplains, shorelines, and polluted city centers. By demanding cuts to dangerous pollution, providing access to green jobs, and spurring economic growth for all Americans, we can begin a fair transition to the economy of the future—one powered by clean and renewable energy. WWF recognizes and supports cities’ transitions toward % renewable energy. WWF also works with communities worldwide on environmentally responsible disaster recovery, reconstruction, and risk reduction. Our Security In the US and around the world, climate change is destabilizing food production, displacing people in vulnerable countries, and threatening our shorelines with sea level rise and more extreme storms. The Paris Agreement is the world’s collective response to addressing climate change in the years to come. Although the US government has signaled its intention to withdraw from this global pact, America’s cities, states, and businesses are working with world leaders to turn the promise of that agreement into concrete action. Our collective security, health, and prosperity rest on urgent and collaborative action. Our Economy American taxpayers are paying the price for weather disasters, crop failures, and higher insurance rates associated with our warming world. The good news is that America’s leading businesses, along with our city and state leaders, are taking the lead on climate action. They are investing in clean renewable energy and locking in cheaper energy prices—and creating jobs, strong communities, and a more stable climate in the process. Our Fresh Water Climate change is altering patterns of weather and water around the world, causing shortages and droughts in some areas and floods in others. These changes will combine to make less water available for agriculture, energy generation, cities and ecosystems around the world. There’s a lot we can do to create a water-secure future, and it starts by learning how much water it takes to make the things in your daily life—from the coffee you drink to the t-shirts you wear. Once you know the water footprint of everyday items, choose wisely and purchase products that have a minimal impact on the places where they come from. Our Oceans Both people and wildlife depend on the health of our oceans as a source of sustenance and livelihood. Our oceans absorb most of the warming and carbon pollution occurring today, even more than the atmosphere. Warmer oceans are driving stronger storms and bleaching coral reefs. As oceans absorb carbon dioxide, they become more acidic, threatening most shelled organisms, including small crustaceans fundamental to the marine food chain. Our Arctic The Artic is warming twice as fast as the rest of the earth, affecting weather around the globe and threatening the foundation of Arctic ecosystems. Arctic summer sea ice is expected to disappear before mid-century, which will have cascading consequences worldwide. We can help conserve this region by protecting the Artic from offshore development, reducing pollution and accidents, and enhancing ecosystem resilience to climate change. What WWF Is Doing To adequately address the climate crisis we must urgently reduce carbon pollution and prepare for the consequences of global warming—which the world is already experiencing—and raise our collective voice for action. Combining global outreach with local expertise, WWF’s focus is on: Building a Low Carbon USA WWF believes that strong action on climate change that grows our economy and strengthens our energy security begins with setting ambitious goals. That is why WWF is working with businesses, cities, and national governments to set emissions reduction goals aligned what science says is needed. And because that strong low carbon economy needs to be powered by clean and cheap renewable energy, WWF is leading businesses and cities to make it very easy to buy. With innovative strategies and partnerships WWF is building momentum for a low-carbon economy by: Helping companies to set and meet science-based targets Urging America’s largest companies use their collective purchasing power to scale up renewable energy and bringing those lessons to help cities do the same. Challenging all US cities to set ambitious goals, transition toward % renewable energy, and address local climate threats Preparing for a Changing World WWF works with local communities, governments, and others around the world to help people and nature prepare for the many impacts of a changing climate. To do this we: Work with communities and governments to understand and prepare for climate change Integrate environmental considerations into disaster recovery, reconstruction, and risk reduction Study how people’s responses to climate change affect ecosystems and wildlife Assess species to determine traits that make them resilient or vulnerable to changes in climate Delivering on the Promise of the Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement is the world’s collective response to addressing climate change in the years to come. Alongside the federal government, America’s cities, states, and businesses are working with world leaders to turn the promise of that agreement into concrete action. WWF is helping accelerate climate action from national governments, and from cities, states, and businesses to deliver on the ambitious temperature goals of the historic Paris Agreement by: Providing financial support to developing countries as an implementing partner of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Building a coalition of non-federal actors in the US who remained committed to the Paris Agreement Helping transition developing countries to clean energy sources like wind and solar Working with companies and cities to transform their businesses to dramatically reduce their emissions throughout their entire value chain Ensuring that ecosystem-based approaches to adaptation are incorporated into national development plans Collaborating with US Latino leaders and communities to raise awareness of climate risks from Latin America to North America Curbing climate pollution from international aviation Reducing Emissions from Deforestation Forests are nature’s greatest technology for combating climate change: they naturally absorb carbon dioxide (CO), reducing the amount of this heat-trapping gas in our atmosphere. When forests are not managed responsibly, they release large quantities of C into the atmosphere. Deforestation and degradation are the largest sources of C emissions after the burning of fossil fuels. Scientists estimate up to % of global carbon emissions come from deforestation. WWF saves forests and fights climate change by: Supporting REDD+, which offers financial incentives to developing countries that create and implement strategies to manage and use their forests responsibly. Creating multi-million dollar funds to properly manage forests that are designated as protected. Working to end illegal logging. Ensuring that global climate change agreements reduce forest loss and degradation. Helping countries and regions assess the benefits nature provides under different development and climate change scenarios. View All Press Releases WWF Statement on the Global Stocktake Technical Dialogue Synthesis Report September ,  WWF Statement on the One-Year Anniversary of the Inflation Reduction Act August ,  WWF Statement on Senate Ratification of Kigali Amendment September ,  Projects The Renewable Thermal Collaborative The Renewable Thermal Collaborative (RTC) is the global coalition for companies, institutions, and governments committed to scaling up renewable heating and cooling at their facilities, dramatically cutting carbon emissions. Biogenic Carbon Footprint Calculator for Harvested Wood Products WWF, in partnership with Quantis, Intl., has developed a free, user-friendly calculator to calculate biogenic emissions for a variety of forest-based products. The calculator's aim is to support companies in the dynamic accounting of biogenic emissions of wood-based products, improving the quality of their greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories and facilitating decision-making around the sustainable sourcing, design, and use of those products. This calculator is a beta test and, if useful and aligned with forthcoming Greenhouse Gas Protocol guidance, will be updated and improved. View More Projects Publications Climate futures across generations and species WWF Calls for Prioritizing Climate Finance in FY Budget Agreement Climate Crowd on the Ground The Potential for Seaweed as Livestock Feed, Workshop Report  View More Publications Experts Nikhil Advani Director, Climate, Communities and Wildlife Shaun Martin Vice President and Deputy, Climate Change Ryan Bartlett Director, Climate Risk Management & Resilience Anita van Breda Senior Director, Environment and Disaster Management Marty Spitzer Senior Director, Climate and Renewable Energy Christa Anderson Director of Climate Science and Carbon Metrics, Climate Change Rebecca Shaw Chief Scientist and Senior Vice President, Global Science David Kuhn Lead, Corporate Resilience Tim Juliani Director, US Corporate Climate Engagement Daniel Riley Director, International Corporate Climate Partnerships Brent Loken Global Food Lead Scientist, Global Science Cihang Yuan Senior Program Officer, International Corporate Climate Partnerships John Holler Climate Cooperation & Sustainable Fuels, Climate Cheryl Margoluis Executive Director, CARE-WWF Alliance Lucas Black Vice President, Climate Finance Marcene Mitchell Senior Vice President, Climate Change How You Can Help Take Action Join us to make change. Speak up for species and places through WWF's Action Center. Give to WWF Make a gift to WWF's global conservation efforts and choose from symbolic adoptions, apparel, and more! Log in Discover Who we are Financials Latest stories Our work Newsroom En español Travel Support Donate now Adopt an animal Give in someone's name Gift and estate planning Connect Take action Get involved Careers Contact Help center WWF country offices Ethics reporting WWF World Wildlife Fund  th Street, N.W. Washington, DC  Connect with us Facebook   YouTube RSS Feeds World Wildlife Fund Inc. is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization (tax ID number -) under Section (c)() of the Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law. Site Terms Privacy PolicyYour Privacy Rights State Disclosures ©  World Wildlife Fund. WWF® and © Panda Symbol are owned by WWF. All rights reserved. 
 Home – Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet NASA Global Climate Change Vital Signs of the Planet Skip Navigation menu close modal Understanding our planet to benefit humankind News & Features The instrument will enable nonprofit organization Carbon Mapper to pinpoint and measure methane and carbon dioxide sources from space. news NASA-Built Greenhouse Gas Detector Moves Closer to Launch Summer of  was Earth’s hottest since global records began in , according to scientists at NASA’s Goddard Institute of Space Studies (GISS) in New York. news NASA Announces Summer  Hottest on Record As the climate changes, the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events are increasing. New Page Extreme Weather and Climate Change No stranger to hot weather, the region is facing more humid heat waves that test the adaptability of its residents. But different areas feel different effects. news NASA Maps Key Heat Wave Differences in Southern California According to scientists at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) in New York, July  was hotter than any other month in the global temperature record. news NASA Clocks July  as Hottest Month on Record Ever Since  What Is Climate Change? Evidence How Do We Know Climate Change Is Real? Evidence How Do We Know Climate Change Is Real? There is unequivocal evidence that Earth is warming at an unprecedented rate. Human activity is the principal cause. more Causes Why Is Climate Change Happening? Causes Why Is Climate Change Happening? Human activities are driving the global warming trend observed since the mid-th century. more Effects What Are the Effects of Climate Change? Effects What Are the Effects of Climate Change? The effects of human-caused global warming are happening now, are irreversible on the timescale of people alive today, and will worsen in the decades to come. more Solutions What Is Being Done to Solve Climate Change? Solutions What Is Being Done to Solve Climate Change? NASA provides the robust scientific data needed to understand climate change. more Evidence How Do We Know Climate Change Is Real? There is unequivocal evidence that Earth is warming at an unprecedented rate. Human activity is the principal cause. more Causes Why Is Climate Change Happening? Human activities are driving the global warming trend observed since the mid-th century. more Effects What Are the Effects of Climate Change? The effects of human-caused global warming are happening now, are irreversible on the timescale of people alive today, and will worsen in the decades to come. more Solutions What Is Being Done to Solve Climate Change? NASA provides the robust scientific data needed to understand climate change. more From space, sky, sea, and land, NASA provides detailed climate data and research to the world. Earth Science in Action People across the world using NASA data to solve big problems right here on Earth. More to Explore Ask NASA Climate Your questions about climate change answered. People Profiles Learn about the people behind NASA Earth science. Quizzes Test your knowledge of climate science. Images of Change Before-and-after images of Earth Columbia Glacier melt, Alaska:  -  Climate Change Resources An extensive collection of global warming resources for media, educators, weathercasters, and public speakers. Explore Images of Change Before-and-after images of Earth Global Ice Viewer Climate change's impact on ice Earth Minute Videos Animated video series illustrating Earth science topics Climate Time Machine Climate change in recent history Resources Multimedia Vast library of images, videos, graphics, and more En español Creciente biblioteca de recursos en español For Educators Student and educator resources For Kids Webquests, Climate Kids, and more Get the Newsletter Stay Connected Facts Evidence Causes Effects Scientific Consensus What Is Climate Change? Vital Signs Extreme Weather Questions (FAQ) News News and Features Subscribe Climate Newsletter Archive Solutions Earth Science in Action Mitigation and Adaptation Sustainability and Government Resources Explore Images of Change Earth Minute Videos Interactives Beautiful Earth Gallery Ask NASA Climate NASA Science Science Mission Directorate NASA Data Resources Earth System Science Earth Science Missions History People More For Media For Educators Multimedia En español For Kids About Us Feedback | Awards | Sitemap | Earth Observatory | SEA LEVEL CHANGE | Privacy | Climate Data Initiative | U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology Site Owner: Anya Biferno Site Editor: Holly Shaftel Managing Editor: Susan Callery Senior Producer: Randal Jackson Senior Science Editor: Daniel Bailey Science Editor: Susan Callery Site last updated: September ,  
 Climate.gov Home Skip to main content Menu Climate.gov Science & information for a climate-smart nation Main Menu Main menu News & Features Home All News & Features Blogs Beyond the Data Blog ENSO Blog Climate And  Climate Case Studies Climate Dashboard Climate Q&A Climate Tech Decision Makers Take  Decision Makers Toolbox El Niño & La Niña Page Event Tracker Featured Images Videos Features News & Research Highlights Understanding Climate View News & Features section Maps & Data Home All Maps & Data Climate Dashboard Climate Data Primer Data Snapshots Dataset Gallery Tools & Interactives View Maps & Data section Teaching Climate Home Climate Dashboard All Teaching Climate Activity Curricula Demos & Experiments Video Visualization Teaching Climate Teaching Energy Toolbox for Climate & Energy Partnership with CLEAN collection View Teaching Climate section Resilience Toolkit About About Us Contact What's New FAQs Sitemap Facebook   YouTube Facebook   YouTube Search Search powered by webLyzard technology September  ENSO Outlook: An El Niño convo News and Features September ,  The September  ENSO Outlook predicts El Niño will stick around at least through January-March . But don't just take it from us, hear directly from the Pacific Ocean and tropical atmosphere, who join the blog to answer some questions. Featured Highlights from State of the Climate  News and Features September ,  U.S. climate outlook for September  News and Features September ,  Does it matter how much the United States reduces its carbon dioxide emissions if China doesn’t do the same? News and Features August ,  Historically, how has El Niño influenced summer temperature and precipitation around the world? News and Features August ,  El Niño means an even floodier future is on the coastal horizon News and Features August ,  Former Hurricane Hilary brought Southern California its first-ever tropical storm watch News and Features August ,  Global Climate Dashboard Tracking climate change and natural variability over time Sort by Indicator: - Any - Climate Change Natural Variability Greenhouse Gases Arctic Sea Ice Carbon Dioxide Mountain Glaciers Ocean Heat Sea Level Spring Snow Incoming Sunlight Surface Temperature View all indicators Popular Sections Data Snapshots Common U.S. and global climate maps for publication and presentation. Browse Data Snapshots Event Tracker Stories and graphics explaining the climate behind the weather. Explore Event Tracker Climate Explorer Map and graph viewer for historical and projected county-level climate data. Launch Climate Explorer Principles of Climate Literacy Educational framework for climate principles and concepts. View Guides Explore Climate.gov Browse News & Features Explore Maps & Data Teach Climate Build Resilience Browse News & Features Like a popular science magazine, News & Features offers stories, images, and videos for the science-interested public. From blogs, to FAQs, to long-read features, this section offers a deep dive into climate science and how climate change and variability affect what matters to us. Browse News & Features Explore Maps & Data Access to common climate maps, data, and tools. Search a dataset catalog, check the status of key environmental indicators with the Global Climate Dashboard, or browse the Data Snapshots collection to locate publication-quality images to grab and re-use. Explore Maps and Data Teach Climate Climate.gov’s Teaching Climate section offers reviewed learning activities and curriculum materials, multimedia resources, and professional development opportunities for formal and informal educators who want to incorporate climate into their work. Find Resources Build Resilience A sister site to Climate.gov, the U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit provides a central repository of climate and environmental data, tools, resources, expertise, and case studies geared toward improving our nation’s capacity to adapt to a variable and changing climate. Learn about resilience Return to top Stay Connected Follow Climate.gov Facebook   YouTube Main Menu Home News & Features Teaching Climate Maps & Data FAQs Contact Feeds Sitemap News & Features News & Features Home Beyond the Data Blog Climate Case Studies Climate Q&A Climate Tech Climate and … Decision Makers Take  Decision Makers Toolbox ENSO Blog Event Tracker Featured Images Featured Videos Features News and Research Highlights Understanding Climate Maps & Data Maps and Data Home Climate Dashboard Climate Data Primer Data Snapshots Dataset Gallery Teaching Climate Teaching Climate Home Demos & Experiments Interactive Tools Multimedia Resources Department of Commerce NOAA Privacy Accessibility FOIA Information Quality No-FEAR Act Ready.gov USA.gov 
 
 IPCC — Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Menu About Data Documentation Focal Points Portal Bureau Portal Library Links Help Languages عربي 简体中文 Français Русский Español Search Reports Synthesis Report Working Groups Activities News Calendar Follow Share Special and Methodology Reports Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers Global Warming of .°C Climate Change and Land  Refinement to the  IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate Sixth Assessment Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis Fifth Assessment Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change View all Working Group I About Reports Resources Activities News Co-Chairs Vice Chairs TSU Staff Contact Working Group II About Reports Activities News Co-Chairs Vice-Chairs TSU Staff Contact Working Group III About Reports Activities News Co-Chairs Vice-Chairs TSU Staff Resources Contact TFI About Organization Reports Activities TFB Co-Chairs TFB Members TSU Staff Contact The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the United Nations body for assessing the science related to climate change. New Bureau IPCC- Latest IPCC wraps up elections in Nairobi — NAIROBI, July  – The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) completed its elections in Nairobi this morning. During the four-day long th Session, the member governments elected the new IPCC Bureau comprising  members, including the new IPCC Chair Read more IPCC elects Jim Skea as the new Chair — NAIROBI, July  – Jim Skea of the United Kingdom is the newly elected Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). With nearly forty years of climate science experience and expertise, Jim Skea will lead the IPCC Read more IPCC to elect its new Bureau at the next session in Nairobi — GENEVA, July  – The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will be electing its new Bureau and the Bureau of the Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) during its th Session to be held in Nairobi, Kenya, Read more Urgent climate action can secure a liveable future for all — INTERLAKEN, Switzerland, March ,  -- There are multiple, feasible and effective options to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to human-caused climate change, and they are available now, said scientists in the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Read more Reports The IPCC prepares comprehensive Assessment Reports about the state of scientific, technical and socio-economic knowledge on climate change, its impacts and future risks, and options for reducing the rate at which climate change is taking place. It also produces Special Reports on topics agreed to by its member governments, as well as Methodology Reports that provide guidelines for the preparation of greenhouse gas inventories. The IPCC is finalizing the Sixth Assessment Report which consists of three Working Group contributions and a Synthesis Report. The Working Group I contribution was finalized in August , the Working Group II contribution in February , the Working Group III contribution in April  and the Synthesis Report in March . Sixth Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  March  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability February  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change April  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis August  Special and Methodology Reports Special Report The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate September  Working Group Report Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers June  Working Group Report Global Warming of .°C October  Working Group Report Climate Change and Land August  Fifth Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  October  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis September  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability March  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change April  Fourth Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report AR Climate Change : Synthesis Report September  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis June  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability July  Working Group Report AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change June  Third Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report TAR Climate Change : Synthesis Report October  Working Group Report TAR Climate Change : The Scientific Basis January  Working Group Report TAR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability May  Working Group Report TAR Climate Change : Mitigation July  Second Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report SAR Climate Change : Synthesis Report October  Working Group Report SAR Climate Change : The Science of Climate Change February  Working Group Report SAR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses July  Working Group Report SAR Climate Change : Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change July  First Assessment Report:  Synthesis Report FAR Climate Change: Synthesis March  Working Group Report FAR Climate Change: Scientific Assessment of Climate Change June  Working Group Report FAR Climate Change: Impacts Assessment of Climate Change July  Working Group Report FAR Climate Change: The IPCC Response Strategies October  Special Report Special Report The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate September  Working Group Report Global Warming of .°C October  Working Group Report Climate Change and Land August  Special Report Aviation and the Global Atmosphere March  Methodology Report Working Group Report Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers June  Methodology Report  IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories May  Working Group Report  IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories April  View all Reports Activities The main activity of the IPCC is the preparation of reports assessing the state of knowledge of climate change. These include assessment reports, special reports and methodology reports. To deliver this work programme, the IPCC holds meetings of its government representatives, convening as plenary sessions of the Panel or IPCC Working Groups to approve, adopt and accept reports. Plenary Sessions of the IPCC also determine the IPCC work programme, and other business including its budget and outlines of reports. The IPCC Bureau meets regularly to provide guidance to the Panel on scientific and technical aspects of its work. The IPCC organizes scoping meetings of experts and meetings of lead authors to prepare reports. It organizes expert meetings and workshops on various topics to support its work programme, and publishes the proceedings of these meetings. To communicate its findings and explain its work, the IPCC takes part in outreach activities organized by the IPCC or hosted by other organizations, and provides speakers to other conferences. More information on sessions of the IPCC, its Working Groups and the Bureau can be found in the Documentation section. Clear Grid List Meeting Opening of the Fifty-ninth Session of the IPCC July ,  Explore UNFCCC IPCC at the Bonn Climate Change conference (SB and SBSTA  ) June ,  Explore Expert Meetings & Workshops IPCC Workshop on the Use of Scenarios in the Sixth Assessment Report and Subsequent Assessments April ,  Explore Meeting Fifty-eighth Session of the IPCC March ,  Explore Other Event IPCC TG-Data Scenario Database and Scenario Explorer Webinars January ,  Explore UNFCCC IPCC at COP November ,  Explore Load More View all Activities The IPCC was created to provide policymakers with regular scientific assessments on climate change, its implications and potential future risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation options. Through its assessments, the IPCC determines the state of knowledge on climate change. It identifies where there is agreement in the scientific community on topics related to climate change, and where further research is needed. The reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. The IPCC does not conduct its own research. IPCC reports are neutral, policy-relevant but not policy-prescriptive. The assessment reports are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. Created by the United Nations Environment Programme (UN Environment) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in , the IPCC has  Member countries. In the same year, the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. Follow Engage There are many ways to engage with the IPCC Learn More Learn more about the IPCC and its processes Working Groups and Task Force IPCC assessments and special reports are prepared by three Working Groups, each looking at a different aspect of the science related to climate change: Working Group I (The Physical Science Basis), Working Group II (Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability), and Working Group III (Mitigation of Climate Change). The IPCC also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, whose main objective is to develop and refine a methodology for the calculation and reporting of national greenhouse gas emissions and removals. The Working Groups and Task Force handle the preparation of reports, selecting and managing the experts that work on them as authors. The activities of each Working Group and the Task Force are supported by their Technical Support Units (TSU). Clear Working Group I The IPCC Working Group I (WGI) aims at assessing the physical scientific basis of the climate system and climate change. August  Explore Working Group II The IPCC Working Group II (WGII) assesses the vulnerability of socio-economic and natural systems to climate change, negative and positive … January  Explore Working Group III The IPCC Working Group III (WG III) assesses options for mitigating climate change through limiting or preventing greenhouse gas emissions … August  Explore TFI The Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) was established by the IPCC to oversee the IPCC National Greenhouse … November  Explore Follow the IPCC The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is active socially – choose your network: Engage with the IPCC There are many ways to be involved and participate in the IPCC world. Learn more ©  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change About Copyright Disclaimer Privacy Policy Search for: Reports Special and Methodology Reports Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers Global Warming of .°C Climate Change and Land  Refinement to the  IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate Sixth Assessment Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis Fifth Assessment Report AR Synthesis Report: Climate Change  AR Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis AR Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability AR Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change View all Working Groups Working Group I About Reports Resources Activities News Co-Chairs Vice Chairs TSU Staff Contact Working Group II About Reports Activities News Co-Chairs Vice-Chairs TSU Staff Contact Working Group III About Reports Activities News Co-Chairs Vice-Chairs TSU Staff Resources Contact TFI About Organization Reports Activities TFB Co-Chairs TFB Members TSU Staff Contact Activities Press Release IPCC wraps up elections in Nairobi NAIROBI, July  – The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) completed its elections in Nairobi this morning. During the … July  Explore Press Release IPCC elects Jim Skea as the new Chair NAIROBI, July  – Jim Skea of the United Kingdom is the newly elected Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on … July  Explore Speeches Opening Remarks by IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee th Session of the IPCC, - July , Nairobi Check against delivery H.E. Minister Soipan Tuya, UNEP Executive Director Ms. Inger Andersen, WMO Secretary General Mr. Petteri Taalas, Distinguished … July  Explore View all Menu Top 
 Climate Change : Development news, research, data | World Bank Skip to Main Navigation Global Search Search button WHO WE ARE Leadership, organization, and history WHAT WE DO Projects, products, and services WHERE WE WORK Countries and regions UNDERSTANDING POVERTY Global data and statistics, research and publications, and topics in poverty and development WORK WITH US Jobs, procurement, training, and events News The World Bank’s digital platform for live-streaming WHO WE ARE With  member countries, staff from more than  countries, and offices in over  locations, the World Bank Group is a unique global partnership: five institutions working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build shared prosperity in developing countries. About the World Bank Overview Organization Partners History Archives Anti-Racism Charter Accountability Annual Reports Access to Information Accountability Mechanism Corporate Scorecard Data Privacy World Bank Group Finances Integrity Vice Presidency Inspection Panel Grievance Redress Service Independent Evaluation Group Compliance Advisor Ombudsman Policies and Procedures Experts And Leaders Office of the President Boards of Governors Boards of Directors Leadership Experts News WHAT WE DO The World Bank Group works in every major area of development. We provide a wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and we help countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges they face. Development Projects Projects By Country By Sector By Theme Country Engagement Environmental and Social Policies for Projects Procurement for Projects and Programs Results Priorities Climate Food Security Human Capital International Development Association (IDA) COVID- Hub Knowledge Research & Publications Data Learning Development Topics Open Knowledge Repository Trust Fund Directory Products & Services Financing Products & Advisory Services Treasury WHERE WE WORK Countries country dropdown Afghanistan Albania shqip Algeria Français عربي Angola Português Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Español Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belarus Русский Belgium Français Belize Benin Français Bhutan Bolivia Español Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Português Bulgaria Български Burkina Faso Français Burundi Français Cabo Verde Português Cambodia ភាសាខ្មែរ Cameroon Français Canada Français Central African Republic Français Chad Français Chile Español China 中文 Colombia Español Comoros Français Democratic Republic of Congo Français Republic of Congo Français Costa Rica Español Cote d'Ivoire Français Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Español Ecuador Español Egypt عربي El Salvador Español Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Europe (Western) Fiji Finland France Français Gabon Français The Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Español Guinea Français Guinea-Bissau Português Guyana Haiti Français Honduras Español Hungary Iceland India Hindi Indonesia Bahasa Iran Iraq عربي Israel Italy Jamaica Japan 日本語 Jordan عربي Kazakhstan Русский Kenya Kiribati Korea Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyz Republic Русский Lao PDR Latvia Lebanon عربي Lesotho Liberia Libya عربي Lithuania Luxembourg Français FYR of Macedonia македонски Madagascar Français Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Français Marshall Islands Mauritania Français Mauritius Français Mexico Español FS Micronesia Moldova română Mongolia Монгол Montenegro Morocco عربي Français Mozambique Português Myanmar Namibia Nepal Netherlands Nicaragua Español Niger Français Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Español Papua New Guinea Paraguay Español Peru Español Philippines Poland Polski Portugal Qatar Romania Română Russia Русский Rwanda Français Samoa Sao Tome and Principe Português Senegal Français Serbia Seychelles Français Sierra Leone Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Sudan Spain Español Sri Lanka St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and Grenadines Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria عربي Tajikistan Русский Tanzania Thailand ภาษาไทย Timor Leste (East Timor) Togo Français Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia عربي Français Turkey Türkçe Turkmenistan Русский Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine Yкраїнський United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States of America Uruguay Español Uzbekistan Русский Vanuatu Venezuela Español Vietnam Tiẽng Việt West Bank and Gaza عربي Yemen عربي Zambia Zimbabwe Recent Searches Regions Africa East Asia and Pacific Europe and Central Asia Latin America and Caribbean Middle East and North Africa South Asia Country Groups European Union Middle Income Countries Organization of Eastern Caribbean States Pacific Islands Small States Gulf Cooperation Council Western Europe UNDERSTANDING POVERTY We face big challenges to help the world’s poorest people and ensure that everyone sees benefits from economic growth. Data and research help us understand these challenges and set priorities, share knowledge of what works, and measure progress. Data & Research Open Data By Country By Indicator Research & Publications Development Topics Climate Change Agriculture and Food Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Poverty Debt Education Health Energy Food Security All Development Topics Search button WORK WITH US For Job Seekers Jobs Programs & Internships For Partners Partners Corporate and Private Foundations Clients Private Sector Corporate Procurement Civil Society Consultations Parliamentarians For Investors World Bank Bonds & Investment Products Treasury For Learners Open Learning Campus Meet Us Events World Bank Live Speaker's Bureau Spring & Annual Meetings Contacts & Inquiries global Search dropdown Search Search button Understanding Poverty Topics This page in: English Español This page in: English Español Climate Change Climate change, poverty, and inequality are the defining issues of our age. The World Bank Group is the biggest multilateral funder of climate investments in developing countries. And we intend to go further in helping countries reduce poverty and rise to the challenges of climate change. Climate Change Home Overview COVID- Featured Climate Change and Paris Alignment "The Climate is Changing, and So Are We” By Axel van Trotsenburg "The Climate is Changing, and So Are We” Explore The World Bank Group and Paris Alignment The World Bank Group and Paris Alignment Download World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan – #ClimateActionWBG World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan – Climate Change At-A-Glance Keeping global temperature rise to below °C will require coordinated global action at an unprecedented scale and speed. The World Bank Group is more committed than ever to helping countries meet their national climate targets. Overview Data CO emissions (kt) Data Project Sierra Leone Integrated and Resilient Urban Mobility Project In , the World Bank financed a transportation project in the coastal Western Area Urban District which addressed risks posed by climate change. The project identified vulnerable corridors through hydraulic modeling and created a more robust mobility system in the event of flash floods or landslides. Projects Focus Areas Adaptation and Resilience Three things you need to know about adaptation and resilience Adaptation and Resilience Climate Finance Three things you need to know about climate finance Climate Finance Ambitious Climate Action Three things you need to know about ambitious climate action in developing countries Ambitious Climate Action Research View All Research Download State and Trends of Carbon Pricing  State and Trends of Carbon Pricing  Download Groundswell: Acting on Internal Climate Migration Groundswell: Acting on Internal Climate Migration Download The Adaptation Principles: A Guide for Designing Strategies for Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience The Adaptation Principles: A Guide for Designing Strategies for Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Download Lifelines : The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity Lifelines : The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity Blogs View All Blogs Experts Jennifer Sara Global Director, Climate Change Group, World Bank Group Jennifer Sara Stéphane Hallegatte Senior Climate Change Adviser Stéphane Hallegatte View All Experts Stay Connected News & Events What's New View All What's New Latest Events View All Events In Depth Country Climate and Development Reports The World Bank Group’s Country Climate and Development Reports (CCDRs) are core diagnostic reports that integrate climate change and development considerations. Country Climate and Development Reports Climate Stories Our Climate Stories series highlights the World Bank Group's support for investments, solutions and innovations that have made a real difference in the lives of people, communities, and economies. Climate Stories Climate Explainer Series Learn about the Word Bank Group’s plans, policies, and tools for fighting climate change from our experts. Climate Explainer Series Sustainable Development Series This series offers insights into innovative and state-of-the-art solutions that can guide countries to build more inclusive and sustainable economies that are resilient in the face of pandemics, climate change and other  Sustainable Development Series IDA and Climate Change IDA helps the poorest nations adapt to climate change by building their resilience to disasters, and promoting sustainable development to minimize their vulnerability. IDA and Climate Change Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition (CPLC) The Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition brings together leaders from across government, the private sector and civil society to share experience working with carbon pricing and to expand the evidence base for the most  Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition (CPLC) IFC Climate Business IFC invests in the private sector in clean energy, sustainable cities, climate-smart agriculture, energy efficiency, green buildings and green finance. IFC Climate Business Climate Biz Podcast The podcast where sustainability meets smart business. Join co-hosts Shari Friedman and Esohe Denise Odaro as they explore how to increase sustainability and reduce the impact of climate change through private sector and  Climate Biz Podcast ConnectClimate ConnectClimate is a global partnership program dedicated to driving climate action with creative communications, by amplifying youth voices and generating advocacy campaigns centered on Film, Fashion, Music and Sports. ConnectClimate Climate Investment Funds The $. billion Climate Investment Funds (CIF) is providing  developing and middle income countries with urgently needed resources to manage the challenges of climate change and reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Climate Investment Funds Forest Carbon Partnership Facility The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility is focused on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, forest carbon stock conservation, the sustainable management of forests, and the enhancement of forest  Forest Carbon Partnership Facility BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes The BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes is focused on reducing emissions from the land sector through smarter land use planning, policies, and practices. BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes Carbon Pricing Dashboard This interactive dashboard provides an up-to-date overview of carbon pricing initiatives around the world and allows users to navigate through the visuals and data of the annual State and Trends of Carbon Pricing report  Carbon Pricing Dashboard Additional Resources Related The World Bank Group and Paris Alignment  Things You Need to Know About Adaptation and Resilience  Things You Need to Know About Climate Finance  Things You Need to Know About Ambitious Climate Action in Developing Countries Contact Media Inquiries Ferzina Banaji fbanaji@worldbankgroup.org About Data Research and Publications Learning News Projects and Operations Countries Topics FOLLOW US Follow us newsletter SUBSCRIBE HERE This Site in: English Español Français عربي Русский 中文 View All » Legal Privacy Notice Site Accessibility Access to Information Jobs Contact SCAM ALERTS REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION IBRD IDA IFC MIGA ICSID © The World Bank, All Rights Reserved. This site uses cookies to optimize functionality and give you the best possible experience. If you continue to navigate this website beyond this page, cookies will be placed on your browser. To learn more about cookies, click here. × 
 Climate Change Coverage Skip to contentNewslettersSubscribeMenuClimate Change Coverage Seven Things to Know About Climate ChangeMagazineSeven Things to Know About Climate ChangeSeven Things to Know About Climate ChangeExploreHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.EnvironmentHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.Hurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.ReadSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.EnvironmentSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.Summer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.ReadThis summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeEnvironmentThis summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeThis summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeReadWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'EnvironmentWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'What does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'ReadLoad MoreLearn about climate change causesCarbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here's what you need to know.EnvironmentCarbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here's what you need to know.Carbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here's what you need to know.ReadMethane, explainedEnvironmentMethane, explainedMethane, explainedReadAerosols, explainedEnvironmentAerosols, explainedAerosols, explainedReadInequality is decreasing between countries—but climate change is slowing progressEnvironmentInequality is decreasing between countries—but climate change is slowing progressForecasts have painted a difficult picture for the future. But one new study argues that climate change has already imposed an economic penalty on many countries.Read StoryKnowledge Is PowerpreviousMagazineThe Blob That Cooked the PacificSee PhotosClimate Change Resources for EducatorsRead MoreMagazineWhat the World Would Look Like if All the Ice MeltedRead Reasons Why U.S. Paris Reversal Won't Derail Climate ProgressReadThe First Official Climate Refugees in the U.S. Race Against TimeReadMagazineThe Blob That Cooked the PacificSee PhotosClimate Change Resources for EducatorsRead MoreMagazineWhat the World Would Look Like if All the Ice MeltedRead Reasons Why U.S. Paris Reversal Won't Derail Climate ProgressReadThe First Official Climate Refugees in the U.S. Race Against TimeReadMagazineThe Blob That Cooked the PacificSee PhotosClimate Change Resources for EducatorsRead MoreMagazineWhat the World Would Look Like if All the Ice MeltedRead Reasons Why U.S. Paris Reversal Won't Derail Climate ProgressReadThe First Official Climate Refugees in the U.S. Race Against TimeReadnext Go FurtherAnimalsMeet the dog who can find rare sea turtle nests at a shocking success rateAnimalsMeet the dog who can find rare sea turtle nests at a shocking success rateWatch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponAnimalsWatch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponAnother rare spotless giraffe has been found. What’s going on?AnimalsAnother rare spotless giraffe has been found. What’s going on?Watch humpbacks intervene as orcas attack a seal in AntarcticaAnimalsWatch humpbacks intervene as orcas attack a seal in AntarcticaNoticing more cicadas this year in the U.S.? There’s a reasonAnimalsNoticing more cicadas this year in the U.S.? There’s a reasonCan great white sharks be friends?AnimalsCan great white sharks be friends?EnvironmentHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.EnvironmentHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.How  volunteers pulled off one of the most difficult cave rescues everEnvironmentHow  volunteers pulled off one of the most difficult cave rescues everStep inside  innovative new workplaces around the globePaid Content for AdvertiserStep inside  innovative new workplaces around the globeSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.EnvironmentSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.This summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeEnvironmentThis summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'EnvironmentWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'There’s only one offshore fish farm in the U.S. Why?EnvironmentThere’s only one offshore fish farm in the U.S. Why?How to store fruits and veggies for maximum freshnessEnvironmentHow to store fruits and veggies for maximum freshnessWhy mangroves are key to mitigating climate changeEnvironmentPerpetual PlanetWhy mangroves are key to mitigating climate changeDeath cap mushrooms are deadly—and spreadingEnvironmentDeath cap mushrooms are deadly—and spreadingWhat should you do with your old tennis balls?EnvironmentWhat should you do with your old tennis balls?Japan releases nuclear wastewater into the PacificEnvironmentJapan releases nuclear wastewater into the PacificHistory & CultureWho were the Tarim Basin mummies? Even scientists were surprised.History & CultureWho were the Tarim Basin mummies? Even scientists were surprised.The true story of the Osage murdersHistory & CultureThe true story of the Osage murdersThis crumbling dam could wipe out cultural treasuresHistory & CultureThis crumbling dam could wipe out cultural treasuresWhat ever happened to cursive writing?History & CultureWhat ever happened to cursive writing?Why are there four heads of John the Baptist?History & CultureWhy are there four heads of John the Baptist?How ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyHistory & CultureHow ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyScienceIn the hunt for alien life, this planet just became a top suspectScienceIn the hunt for alien life, this planet just became a top suspectDid you forget what to do if you get COVID? Here’s a refresher.ScienceCoronavirus CoverageDid you forget what to do if you get COVID? Here’s a refresher.This is what the first stars looked like as they were being bornScienceThis is what the first stars looked like as they were being bornAre you drinking water all wrong? Here’s what you need to know about hydrating.ScienceAre you drinking water all wrong? Here’s what you need to know about hydrating.Inside the making of the world’s most powerful telescopeScienceProofInside the making of the world’s most powerful telescopeNASA’s Webb telescope is rewriting the story of space and timeScienceNASA’s Webb telescope is rewriting the story of space and timeTravelIt’s leaf-peeping season: Avoid the crowds on these scenic drivesTravelAdventures EverywhereIt’s leaf-peeping season: Avoid the crowds on these scenic drivesExplore New Zealand's newest Great Walk trailTravelExplore New Zealand's newest Great Walk trailYour UK autumn camping guidePaid Content for AdvertiserYour UK autumn camping guideShould you still travel if you have Covid?TravelShould you still travel if you have Covid?Discover Zurich’s progressive plant-based food scenePaid Content for AdvertiserDiscover Zurich’s progressive plant-based food sceneHow to plan a wine-tasting tour in ChampagneTravelHow to plan a wine-tasting tour in ChampagneSubscriber Exclusive ContentpreviousMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExplorenext See MoreLegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsChildren's Online Privacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsAbout Nielsen MeasurementDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationOur SitesNat Geo HomeAttend a Live EventBook a TripBuy MapsInspire Your KidsShop Nat GeoVisit the D.C. MuseumWatch TVLearn About Our ImpactSupport Our MissionMastheadPress RoomAdvertise With UsJoin UsSubscribeCustomer ServiceRenew SubscriptionManage Your SubscriptionWork at Nat GeoSign Up for Our NewslettersContribute to Protect the PlanetFollow usNational Geographic FacebookNational Geographic National Geographic United States (Change)Copyright © - National Geographic SocietyCopyright © - National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved 
 The Climate Reality Project Skip to main content JOIN OUR WEST AFRICA CLIMATE REALITY LEADERSHIP TRAINING APPLY TODAY >> Main Menu Close Sign Up About Us Take Action Our Work JOIN A TRAINING Donate search JOIN A TRAINING Donate At The Climate Reality Project, our global network of . million is working to build a just and sustainable true net-zero future. Join us. Get the tools, training, and network to help stop global warming and build a net-zero future for the Earth. Your Email Address I'm In! Hidden link for modal How We Get to True Net-Zero We train and mobilize people worldwide with four global campaigns to accelerate climate action this decade and help us reach true net-zero by  – the point where global warming can stop in as little as three-to-five years and the Earth begins to heal. Reducing Emissions Working to build a clean energy future by cutting emissions and opposing new fossil fuel infrastructure. LEARN MORE → Calling out Greenwashing Exposing the lies fossil fuel companies tell and countering with the truth about the energy transition we need. LEARN MORE → Financing a Just Transition Mobilizing global finance to build thriving clean energy economies. LEARN MORE → Strengthening International Cooperation on Climate Fighting to keep the Paris Agreement strong, hold governments to their commitments, and reform the COP process. LEARN MORE → Train with Al Gore Join the Climate Reality Leadership Corps by attending a multi-day training with former US Vice President Al Gore and leading scientists and experts and get the tools, know-how, and network to make a difference on climate. LEARN MORE → Take Action Now Join our Training in West Africa→ Urge new World Bank President Ajay Banga to take climate action→ Learn More About The Climate Crisis→ Take the Electrification Pledge→ Climate Reality in Action July ,  When We Are Taking Care of Our Environment, We Are Actually Taking Care of Ourselves July ,  Climate Reality New York Coalition Helps Pass Landmark Building Electrification Legislation July ,  Fighting Fossil Fuels – and Winning – in the Susquehanna Valley July ,  Climate Reality Central Minnesota Chapter Helps Pass Green Bank Legislation  th Street NW Suite  Washington, DC  Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Make an Impact Join a Training Join a Chapter Get Updates Our Climate Blog Articles Stories Videos About Us Our Mission Climate and Environmental Justice Climate Justice For All Project Grants Chapters Branches Strategic Partnerships Who We Are Work With Us Donate Press Reality Hub OUR INITIATIVES Climate Reality Leadership Corps % Committed Our Climate Moment  Hours of Reality Public Webinars Campus Corps 
 Climate | Union of Concerned Scientists Skip to main content × Search Search Utility Menu About toggle Accomplishments Funding & Financials Mission & Values Ways to Give History Regional Work Programs People Racial Equity Jobs Media Center Take Action toggle Climate Accountability Climate Campaign for the Future Power Ahead Transforming Transportation Preventing Nuclear War Healthy Food and Farms A Healthier Democracy Science Forward Science for Environmental Justice Science Network toggle Be a Science Advocate Build Skills Connect Reports & Multimedia en español Donate Donate + Donate now Renew Become a member Give monthly Gift memberships Gifts in honor & memory More ways to give % of funds go directly to programs Climate Feature Danger Season  This tool, updated daily, shows how many people across the United States face risks right now from climate impacts. Climate Change Climate change is one of the most devastating problems humanity has ever faced—and the clock is running out. Learn more about Climate Impacts Science Accountability Solutions Demand that fossil fuel CEOs stop fueling forest fires. Send Letter Energy Video The Power Grid Is a Top Climate Solution. But What Is It? The power grid makes modern life possible—but it’s also holding us back. Energy The energy choices we make today could make or break our ability to fight climate change. Learn more about Energy Renewable Energy Nuclear Power Fossil Fuels Solutions Demand Congress invest in a clean energy future. Send Letter Transportation Report Cleaner Cars Cleaner Air Driving older gasoline and diesel vehicles exposes people to a significant amount of harmful air pollution. Transportation Our transportation system is outdated and broken—and it needs to change. Learn more about Transportation Technologies Oil Solutions Tell Congress we need electric vehicle infrastructure nationwide. Send Letter Food Report Lost Inheritance Unless the legal issue known as heirs' property is resolved, Black farmers will continue to lose their land. Food and Farms The US food system should be providing healthy, sustainable food for everyone. Why isn’t it? Learn more about Food Sustainable Agriculture Healthy Food Food Justice Solutions Act now to protect climate-focused investments on farms. Send Letter Nuclear Weapons Blog series The War on Ukraine UCS experts are closely tracking Putin's ongoing invasion of Ukraine. Nuclear Weapons They’re the most dangerous invention the world has ever seen. Can we prevent them from being used again? Learn more about Nuclear Weapons Justice Worldwide Missile Defense Solutions Take action to expand recognition and compensation for nuclear weapons victims. Act Now Science & Democracy Report Invisible Threat, Inequitable Impact Ethylene oxide poses a largely invisible and unrecognized threat to nearby communities. Science and Democracy Democracy and science can be powerful partners for the public good—and both are under attack. Learn more about Science & Democracy Independent Science Evidence-Based Decisions A Healthier Democracy Help strengthen scientific integrity at federal agencies. Take Action Take Action Donate Donate + Donate now Renew Become a member Give monthly Gift memberships Gifts in honor & memory More ways to give % of funds go directly to programs Menu Close× Main Menu Climate toggle Impacts Science Accountability Solutions Energy toggle Renewable Energy Nuclear Power Fossil Fuels Solutions Transportation toggle Technologies Oil Solutions Food toggle Sustainable Agriculture Healthy Food Food Justice Solutions Nuclear Weapons toggle Justice Worldwide Missile Defense Solutions Science & Democracy toggle Independent Science Evidence-Based Decisions A Healthier Democracy Utility Menu About toggle Accomplishments Funding & Financials Mission & Values Ways to Give History Regional Work Programs People Racial Equity Jobs Media Center Take Action toggle Climate Accountability Climate Campaign for the Future Power Ahead Transforming Transportation Preventing Nuclear War Healthy Food and Farms A Healthier Democracy Science Forward Science for Environmental Justice Science Network toggle Be a Science Advocate Build Skills Connect Reports & Multimedia Jason ReedReuters Climate Change Climate change is one of the most devastating problems that humanity has ever faced—and the clock is running out. Table of Contents Climate change is one of the most devastating problems that humanity has ever faced—and the clock is running out. What we're facing What we're facing For over  years, humanity has powered itself with fossil fuels like oil and coal. We’ve seen an enormous amount of development and progress—but at an incredible cost. When burnt, fossil fuels all release carbon dioxide, which acts like a blanket around the earth. As the amount of carbon dioxide increases, the planet warms up. Sea levels rise. Extreme weather becomes more commonplace. A whole range of impacts—from wildfires, to flooding, to extreme heat and drought—become more likely and more severe. If we do nothing, these impacts will worsen. Large swaths of the world’s population will likely migrate. Entire island nations may disappear. The magnitude and range of impacts means that almost every human on Earth will be affected, if they’re not already. Low-income communities and people of color will be hit the hardest. But change is still possible. Science suggests that we can avoid the worst impacts of climate change if we limit warming to under ºC. To do so, we need a much cleaner economy by mid-century or sooner. Fossil fuel companies need to stop preventing climate action. And leaders in the United States need to act. You can help. Learn more Learn more Climate Impacts Climate Science Fossil Fuel Accountability Solutions Explainer What is Climate Resilience? Solving the climate crisis isn’t just about cutting carbon emissions. It’s about protecting people from harm. Sign up for UCS email today Get the latest updates on our work to fight climate change and how you can help right from your inbox. By signing up, you’ll receive emails from UCS. You can opt out at any time. Get involved Get involved Climate Disinformation Fossil Fuels Climate Accountability Major fossil fuel companies studied climate change. Then they denied it. Now they should be held accountable. Demand that fossil fuel CEOs stop fueling forest fires. Send Letter Climate Impacts Science The Climate Campaign for the Future Scientists and activists working for climate justice together. Tell Google & YouTube: Stop profiting off climate disinformation. Take Action Climate Energy Renewables Power Ahead We need modern electricity. Our future depends on it. Demand Congress invest in a clean energy future. Send Letter Climate Energy Transportation Transforming Transportation Our transportation system is a mess. Let’s fix it. Tell Congress we need electric vehicle infrastructure nationwide. Send Letter What you can do: Use clean energy Home energy efficiency improvements and efficient appliances are two of the easiest ways to lower your carbon footprint. Many states provide free assessments and tax incentives to make your home more energy efficient. If you're able, you can also purchase solar panels or support renewable power programs through your electric utility—they’ll likely pay for themselves. Support clean transportation Transportation is the leading source of US carbon emissions. By using public transportation, driving and flying less, and if you can afford it, switching to an electric or hybrid electric vehicle, you can do your part to cut transportation pollution. Eat less meat, especially beef Raising livestock accounts for roughly  percent of global greenhouse gases. Cattle are particularly harmful, as their digestive systems release methane, a powerful heat-trapping gas. Make your voice heard To avoid the worst impacts of climate change, we need strong leadership and nationwide policy changes. Write and call your elected officials, participate in local meetings, and, above all, vote. “Science tells us the planet is warming, the impacts we’re seeing today are already serious, and our future is in our hands. UCS is the most effective organization I know for addressing those truths head-on." Katharine Hayhoe, atmospheric scientist and lead author of US National Climate Assessments How we work Research the world’s most pressing issues Fight misinformation and defend science Communicate with the media, the public, and decisionmakers Mobilize our , supporters to advocate for change Learn more Experts Meet the experts Juan Declet-Barreto Senior Social Scientist for Climate Vulnerability Sandra Sattler Senior Energy Modeler Chitra Kumar Director, Climate & Energy Program See all Accomplishments Accomplishments Jonathan SchmerPexels April  Cleaner Air in California as Trucks Rule Passes UCS analysis and advocacy helped shape, strengthen, and pass a CA rule requiring large fleets of commercial trucks, delivery vans, and buses to transition to zero-emission vehicles by —a huge win for cleaner air and reducing global warming emissions. Read blog See all We're all in this together. Help fight climate change—and more. $ $ $ $ $ Other Make it monthly Donate Related resources Podcast Wet Hot American Summer Jess talks with UCLA climate scientist and Weather West blogger Dr. Daniel Swain about this summer of extremes. Podcast Bad Neighbors Jess tells the stories of three invisible threats harming residents of major US cities with help from Julie McNamara and Darya Minovi of the Union of Concerned Scientists. Report Truck Pollution in the United States State-level fact sheets on tailpipe pollution from trucks and buses. Activist Resource The Science and Climate Litigation Webinar Series Trainings, discussions, and case studies focused on the intersection of law, climate change, and science. See all Get email updates Sign up for updates from UCS; unsubscribe at any time. Get text alerts Text "SCIENCE" to  or sign up online. Sign up or text "SCIENCE" to . Receive urgent alerts about opportunities to defend science. Recurring messages. Reply STOP to cancel. Msg & data rates may apply. Terms, Conditions, and Privacy Policy. Support our work $ $ $ $ $ Other Make it monthly Donate Visit the store Listen to the podcast View the blog Footer Privacy Policy State Disclosures FAQ Media Center Jobs Contact © Union of Concerned Scientists We are a (c)() nonprofit organization.  Brattle Square, Cambridge MA , USA () - Facebook  Youtube  Close× Tell Big Oil: Stop Fueling Forest Fires We can't sit back and watch our communities go up in smoke while corporate profits soar. You'll receive updates and urgent action alerts from UCS. You can unsubscribe at any time. We use cookies to improve your experience. By continuing, you accept our use of cookies. Learn more. I accept Close× Support our work $ $ $ $ $ Other Make it monthly Donate Other ways to give Renew Honor & memory Become a member Give monthly Make a planned gift Gift memberships More ways to give Your donation at work % of funds go directly to programs 
Climate CentralAbout usAbout usTeamCareersPress releasesEquityOur storyOur approachOur workProgramsToolsSpecial topicsData productsSea Level RiseClimate Central’s Program on Sea Level Rise strives to provide accurate, clear and granular information about sea level rise and coastal flood hazards both locally and globally, today and tomorrow. Climate MattersClimate Matters is a reporting resource program that helps meteorologists and journalists report on climate impacts and solutions in ways that are local, immediate, and personal — grounded in the latest science.Partnership JournalismClimate Central's Partnership Journalism program collaborates with local newsrooms nationwide, including print, radio, digital and TV outlets.Climate Shift Index ™Revealing the realtime fingerprints of climate change on local weathersee all programsImpactStoriesResearchGiveGive nowWays to giveResourcesOpen search boxSearchCheck the Climate Shift Index™ to score climate change's influence on today's temperature anywhere.Researching and communicating climate change impacts and solutionsWe use science and technology to generate thousands of local storylines and compelling visuals that make climate change personal and show what can be done about it.About usScience made clearHelping journalists bring climate science into reportingClimate MattersExploration made easyPowerful tools to understand impacts and solutionsCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsGlobal Climate Shift IndexSee the daily influence of climate change on local temperatures around the world.Picturing Our FutureVisualize how climate and energy choices this decade will influence sea levels for hundreds of years.Sinking Tax BaseQuantify the impact of sea level rise on county tax bases as property lines move inland.Climate Shift IndexDemonstrate immediate impacts by using the Climate Shift Index (TM) to put a number on the daily influence of climate change on local weather conditions.Weather PowerCreate and download graphical forecasts of daily wind or solar electricity generation for any U.S. media market, county, or congressional districtRisk FinderExplore the risks of sea level rise and coastal flooding in any U.S. community with downloadable tables and figures, maps, local projections, and potential impacts to populations, land, property values, and moreCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsGlobal Climate Shift IndexSee the daily influence of climate change on local temperatures around the world.Picturing Our FutureVisualize how climate and energy choices this decade will influence sea levels for hundreds of years.Sinking Tax BaseQuantify the impact of sea level rise on county tax bases as property lines move inland.Climate Shift IndexDemonstrate immediate impacts by using the Climate Shift Index (TM) to put a number on the daily influence of climate change on local weather conditions.Weather PowerCreate and download graphical forecasts of daily wind or solar electricity generation for any U.S. media market, county, or congressional districtRisk FinderExplore the risks of sea level rise and coastal flooding in any U.S. community with downloadable tables and figures, maps, local projections, and potential impacts to populations, land, property values, and moreCoastal Risk Screening ToolExplore local sea level rise and coastal flooding risks worldwide with maps that use the most advanced available global model of coastal elevationsRealtime reporting resourcesProduction-ready, localized visuals just a click awayExplore all Climate Matters materials in our resource libraryClimate MattersBurning Hot:  Years of Fire Weather Across the United StatesIncreasing heat and dryness are putting more people at risk from fire weather across America. Climate Matters Summer PackageSummer is here and hotter than ever. Summers have warmed in  U.S. locations—by .°F on average since .Climate MattersMore Risky Heat Days in  U.S. LocationsThe annual number of risky heat days has increased in  U.S. locations since , according to Climate Central analysis.Climate MattersSevere Storm, Supercell, and Tornado TrendsMore billion-dollar severe storms. More storms with tornadic potential. Severe weather hazards shifting east into additional vulnerable communities—and extending earlier into winter months. Climate MattersShifting Planting ZonesAs the U.S. warms, planting zones are shifting north—affecting which plants farmers and gardeners can grow in their local area. Climate MattersIntroducing the Global Climate Shift Index ™Climate Central's new CSI-Global tool provides real-time scores indicating how climate change is affecting daily temperatures around the world—including ,+ cities.Climate MattersBillion-Dollar Disasters in The U.S. has already experienced  billion-dollar disasters in —well above the annual average, reflecting the long-term rise in the frequency of such devastating events. High-impact news collaborationsPartnerships supporting local newsrooms with world-class resourcesLearn moreWind of Change: Energy Blows Across Nebraska Thanks to Wind Farms(With The Reader)Partnership JournalismApril , Surviving the Water: New York City’s Flooding Crisis in the Age of Climate Change(With Documented)Partnership JournalismApril , The View from Above: Climate Change Poses Threats to Nebraska’s Birds — And People(With The Reader)Partnership JournalismMarch , US coastal wetlands are rapidly disappearing. Here's what it'll take to save them(With Quartz)Partnership JournalismMarch , Fire weather extremes make prescribed burns riskier, but more essential than ever(With KUNR)Partnership JournalismDecember , After Ian and Nicole, experts warn of health risks from blue-green algae(With ADAPTWJCT)Partnership JournalismNovember , As rising seas flood Charleston's fairways, its municipal golf course leads in adapting(With ABC Charleston)Partnership JournalismNovember , How climate change could sink NJ’s tax base — and not just at the Shore(with NJ Spotlight News)Partnership JournalismOctober , Historic Harriet Tubman Sites at Risk of Rising Seas on Eastern Shore(with NBC Washington)Partnership JournalismApril , Data may be Colorado’s best bet to mitigate increasing wildfire risk on the Front Range(with The Colorado Sun)Partnership JournalismJanuary , A world made safer for allCritical work in support of socially and economically disadvantaged groupsLearn moreNewsletter signupLooking for Climate Matters? Sign up hereSign upSee monthly highlights from Climate CentralSupport our work There are lots of ways to help fund Climate Central todayLearn moreContact UsCareersGive nowWays to giveFinancialsFundersFacebookYouTubeCopyright ©  Climate CentralTerms of usePrivacy policyEditorial independence
 Home - ClimateWorks Foundation Services Global Intelligence Global Collaborations Global Grantmaking Grants database Programs Carbon Dioxide Removal Cooling Clean Cooling Collaborative Finance Food & Agriculture Forests & Land Use Climate and Land Use Alliance Menu spacer Governance & Diplomacy Independent Global Stocktake Industry Power Transportation Aviation Maritime Shipping Road Transportation Resources Reports Blog Events Press Releases In the News Media center About People Board Staff Careers Partners Funding Partners Grantee Partners Regional Partners Justice, equity, diversity, & inclusion Contact Us Financial Information Search for: The foundationfor a thriving planet A global platform for philanthropy to innovate and accelerate climate solutions that scale. Let’s end the climate crisis. At ClimateWorks, we envision a planet that is a thriving home for all living beings for generations to come. We’re on a mission to end the climate crisis by amplifying the power of philanthropy. About us Featured resources Report ClimateWorks’  Annual Report: Materializing Real-World Change in   was a year of great learning and stepped-up action across the climate landscape. Despite formidable headwinds,  was a year of significant climate wins and real-wor… Read More Aug ,  Blog Post Philanthropy helped shape the Inflation Reduction Act — and must work to ensure it… August ,  marks one year since President Joe Biden signed the historic Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) — the boldest action thus far by the United States to reduc… Read More Aug ,  Report Global Intelligence Funding trends : Climate change mitigation philanthropy Oct ,  Blog Post Global Intelligence New data shows potential pathways for climate change mitigation In April , the ClimateWorks Global Intelligence team published Achieving global climate goals by : Pathways to a .° C future — a climate modeling report th… Read More Sep ,  Report Carbon Dioxide Removal Labor and community development opportunities associated with seaweed-based climat… Seaweed cultivation has emerged as part of a suite of methods for removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, as it enhances the ability of the ocean to act as a natural … Read More Sep ,  Blog Post AviationCarbon Dioxide RemovalCoolingFinanceFood & AgricultureForests & Land UseGlobal IntelligenceGovernance & DiplomacyiGSTIndustryJustice & EquityMaritime ShippingPowerRoad Transportation ClimateWorks at Climate Week  Climate Week NYC gathers leaders from the public and private sectors for hundreds of events, in person and online, from September -, . This is an opportunity to ga… Read More Sep ,  We fast-track climate solutions that benefit people and the planet. Working with grantmakers and implementing partners worldwide, ClimateWorks’ programs and services are helping to bend the emissions curve and address the climate crisis. Our programsWith a diversified global portfolio of grantmaking and strategies, ClimateWorks’ programs amplify the power of philanthropy to advance climate solutions. Our servicesInformed by global partnerships and deep experience in climate philanthropy, ClimateWorks provides grantmakers with services to assess, build, evolve, and execute high-impact climate strategies. From grassroots action to global policy, our grants support organizations and initiatives that are working to end the climate crisis. See grants $.+ billionOur world-class grantmaking infrastructure enables us to invest effectively in a wide range of global philanthropic opportunities. We’ve granted over $. billion since . + granteesOur grantee network includes more than  organizations that advance climate solutions in over  countries. ,+ grantsOur grantmaking capabilities have established us as a leading global grantmaker. We’ve made over , grants since . Get the latest news from ClimateWorks Subscribe Services Global Intelligence Global Collaborations Global Grantmaking Programs Carbon Dioxide Removal Cooling Finance Food & Agriculture Forests & Land Use Governance & Diplomacy Industry Power Transportation Grants database Resources Reports Blog Events Press releases In the news Media center About us People Partners Justice, equity, diversity, & inclusion Whistleblower policy Privacy policy Contact us © ClimateWorks Foundation, all rights reserved. 
 Global Warming and Climate Change skepticism examined Look up a Term Close Panel CLAM Bake Close Clams Climate Science Glossary Term Lookup Enter a term in the search box to find its definition. Settings Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off). Term Lookup Term: Define Settings Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life:  seconds  seconds  seconds  seconds  minute Until closed All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. -. Cambridge University Press. Home Arguments Software Resources Comments The Consensus Project Translations About Support Climate's changed before It's the sun It's not bad There is no consensus It's cooling Models are unreliable Temp record is unreliable Animals and plants can adapt It hasn't warmed since  Antarctica is gaining ice View All Arguments Username Password New? Register here Forgot your password? Latest Posts Patrick Brown's recycled hallucination of climate science Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Climate Adam: If we stop emitting then what..? At a glance - Does cold weather disprove global warming? Hotter ocean temperatures from global warming likely increased Idalia’s destructive power by at least -%  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Exploring the feasibility of a new feature: Bunk of the Week Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle: Downloads and Translations At a glance - Is CO a pollutant? John F. Clauser: the latest climate science-denying physicist  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # From Knowledge to Power - an interview with John Perona: scientist, author, and blogger Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  How is climate change affecting China’s cropland? At a glance - How much is sea level rising? Eastern Canada wildfires: Climate change doubled likelihood of ‘extreme fire weather’  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  ClimateAdam: The Vlog Brothers on geoengineering At a glance - How substances in trace amounts can cause large effects Hawaii’s climate future: Dry regions get drier with global warming, increasing fire risk - while wet areas get wetter  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Climate Adam: Could Climate Change cause an Ocean Tipping Point Soon..? At a glance - Is extreme weather caused by global warming? Do phrases like ‘global boiling’ help or hinder climate action?  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Working in the Rebuttals Update Factory Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Archives Explaining climate change science & rebutting global warming misinformation Global warming is real and human-caused. It is leading to large-scale climate change. Under the guise of climate "skepticism", the public is bombarded with misinformation that casts doubt on the reality of human-caused global warming. This website gets skeptical about global warming "skepticism". Our mission is simple: debunk climate misinformation by presenting peer-reviewed science and explaining the techniques of science denial, discourses of climate delay, and climate solutions denial. Patrick Brown's recycled hallucination of climate science Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom Creating external costs Coming off very much as a disgruntled ex-academic, the Breakthrough Institute's Patrick Brown recently blew his top over what some might interpret as frustration about failure to place enough articles on their own merit into "prestige" journals. Brown decided to deal with that by tactical expediency, leaving him feeling squeamish and seeking to explain and justify himself— by smearing his former colleagues in research. Brown vents his pent-up feelings in an op-ed which has poured like sweet music into the desperately thirsty and pathetically grateful ears of climate science deniers spanning the globe. We'll be hearing echoes of Brown's impulsively emotional blurt for a very long time given that workable material for climate contrarians to repeat is scanty— meaning Brown has caused durable material harm to climate progress. It's to no good end. There's no silver lining here, no net gain, no legitimate cause being promoted; Brown's opinions are easily shown as factually incorrect. Brown's screed hinges on a set of bold claims in connection with a paper recently published in Nature for which he was lead author. The underpinnings of Brown's assertions are that he's juiced his work into rare success by employing deceptive practices. He frames his argument as a mea culpa, belated regret over choices he freely made and apparently would now like to excuse by scapegoating bystanders— another risky choice. From his anecdotal self-imposed experience through creating an outlier report, Brown concludes that he "knows" things: "I knew not to try to quantify key aspects other than climate change in my research because it would dilute the story that prestigious journals like Nature and its rival, Science, want to tell." "And the editors of these journals have made it abundantly clear, both by what they publish and what they reject, that they want climate papers that support certain preapproved narratives—even when those narratives come at the expense of broader knowledge for society." "The first thing the astute climate researcher knows is that his or her work should support the mainstream narrative" "we didn’t bother to study the influence of these other obviously relevant factors. Did I know that including them would make for a more realistic and useful analysis? I did. But I also knew that it would detract from the clean narrative centered on the negative impact of climate change and thus decrease the odds that the paper would pass muster with Nature’s editors and reviewers." Brown is long on accusations but comes up short on evidence, in common with previous variations on a broad theme we've often heard: "climate science and academic peer review are suborned by a cabal of [globalists] [communists] [progressives] [other conspiratorial hobbyhorse]." And scientists, of course. We've already read these scripts and "scientists are corrupt" is boringly familiar— and wrong. Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables In this week's governmentNGO section we have a survey from IPSOS gauging experience of climate change in the day-to-day by persons in the US, One in four Americans say climate change will make it harder to live in their area. Many people struggle to separate their sensory perceptions from matters of metaphysics, with ideology strongly coloring their worldview. We live in a world that is quantitatively different than that our parents were born into, but we don't necessarily see that: Perhaps because of the wide-reaching experience with extreme weather this summer, about one in four Americans say climate change will make it more difficult to live in their area, and most expect extreme weather to continue in the future. Notably, partisanship colors Americans’ experience with extreme weather and their views on climate change overall, with more Democrats reporting experiences with extreme weather and belief in the adverse effects of climate change than Republicans. The IPSOS survey tapped into consciousness of what it means to live in a warming world, and with increasingly frequency that means living through heatwaves. The meaning and import of terms varies; experts on weather understand heatwaves differently than laypeople or epidemiologists. In Climatic Change Sofia Boni et al. thoroughly explore the concept and meaning of "heatwave" and how impacts of heatwaves are perceived and processed in a variety of ways, all challenged by the non-stationarity of our moderm climate. It's good to get onto the same page with such matters, and What is a heat(wave)? An interdisciplinary perspective gets that job done. Let alone addressing main urgencies, cooperation against a common enemy might have side-benefits. Via Advances in Climate Change Research Cui et al. deliver a highly detailed assessment of respective coal generation plant inventory for two global superpowers, with an eye to coordinated retirement. A U.S.-China coal power transition and the global . °C pathway describes some low-hanging fruit that could be dragged down by two major actors working in concert, yieldingswift and deep emission reductions: Globally, the joint U.S.-China coal transition itself can lower overall energy-related CO emissions by about % in  relative to , and a catalytic effect from the possibility of other country taking compatible actions would increase the emission reductions to % by . In their opinion piece Proposing a .°C climate target for a safer future in PLOS Climate, Breyer et al. provide a brief but well-grounded and compelling argument to rethink the safety of the globally agreed .°C allowable amount of planetary surface temperature rise. They go on to identify components to drop that figure by rd, and in so doing they must hypothesize DACCS (direct air capture with carbon storage) on a massive scale. DACCS is the plaything of legacy energy interests and hence buffeted by bad ink and bad optics but stripping that aside, what about the math? That can and should be handled seperately, for calm consideration: To attain a .°C climate target within acceptable certainty, about  GtCOa of CDR would be needed from the early s onwards. While enormous, in that it would approximate current CO emissions, this amount of CDR using DACCS would require only –% of global primary energy demand under two conditions: continued very rapid scaling of PV and strong energy efficiency gains of low-temperature DACCS by utilising heat pumps, while low-cost heat for DACCS may be also supplied by geothermal or solar thermal heat. Under these conditions, a .°C world would become plausible in industrial, financial, and societal terms. Diverse CDR portfolios combining different natural climate solutions and sustainable technological solutions can enable the massive CDR needed for achieving a .°C climate target by end-century facilitating safe climate conditions for civilisation. Renewable energy deployment in Europe: Do politics matter?, Silva et al., Environment, Development & Sustainability. Spot the key unsupported conclusion in this arguably neoliberal-tinged analysis. Nobody with common sense likes being boxed into further tampering with Earth's climate system, but arguing over that without full information won't close the issue or make the option magically go away. Yue et al. publishing in Nature Climate and Atmospheric Science break some new ground and find a mixed bag, in Thermosteric and dynamic sea level under solar geoengineering. The authors report that sea level wouldn't be affected equally on all coastlines with large employment of SAI (stratospheric aerosol injection), arguably complicating an already challenging decision space. Results hint at matters of equity and as well impacts on potentially important carbon feedback reservoirs. Unprecedented Historical Erosion of US Gulf Coast: A Consequence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise?, Anderson et al., Earth's Future. Cutting to the chase: Yes. The ubiquitous shift toward increased shoreline erosion along the US Gulf Coast during the th century is most plausibly due to the historical acceleration of sea-level rise, currently about an order of magnitude faster than during the late Holocene. With the continued increase in the rate of sea-level rise, coastal populations, engineered shorelines, and use of dwindling sand resources along the US Gulf Coast, there is a critical need to adapt management practices to this new state of continuous landward retreat. Given the variable behavior of wave-dominated coasts during the late Holocene and modern times, coastal inundation models are poorly suited for predicting changes in wave-dominated coastal settings in coming decades. These models likely under-estimate the rate and magnitude of change.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects A strong high-temperature event in late-spring  in Yunnan province, Southwest China: Characteristics and possible causes, Dong et al., Atmospheric Research .j.atmosres.. An asymmetric relationship between Tibetan Plateau surface temperature regimes and oceanic–atmospheric circulations, Bafitlhile & Liu, International Journal of Climatology .joc. Causes of  summer marine heatwave in the East China Seas, Hong-Jian et al., Advances in Climate Change Research Open Access .j.accre... Contrasting Deep and Shallow Winter Warming over the Barents–Kara Seas on the Intraseasonal Time Scale, Li et al., Journal of Climate .jcli-d--. Doubling of surface oceanic meridional heat transport by non-symmetry of mesoscale eddies, Wang et al., Nature Communications Open Access pdf .s--- Evaluation of multi-level upper ocean heat content and its relationship with intensity and translation speed of tropical cyclones in the North Indian Ocean, Albert & Bhaskaran, Theoretical and Applied Climatology .s--- Read more  comments Climate Adam: If we stop emitting then what..? Posted on  September  by Guest Author This video includes conclusions of the creator climate scientist Dr. Adam Levy. It is presented to our readers as an informed perspective. Please see video description for references (if any). Burning fossil fuels is heating the planet. But if we quit our fossil fuel habit and stop emitting greenhouse gases what happens then? Answers seem to vary from "global warming will stop" to "we can expect more and more climate change to come". So which is right? And what would it really take to stop climate change and protect ourselves as much as possible? Support ClimateAdam on patreon: https:patreon.comclimateadam Read more  comments At a glance - Does cold weather disprove global warming? Posted on  September  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "Does cold weather disprove global warming?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance Late November-early December  saw a memorable, bitterly cold snap in the UK that many residents will still remember. According to the UK Met Office on the night of November -: "Last night saw November minimum temperature records fall across the country. Most notably both Wales and Northern Ireland recorded the coldest November night since records began. In Wales, temperatures fell to - °C at Llysdinam, near Llandrindod Wells, Powys. Northern Ireland recorded -. °C at Lough Fea. Scotland recorded a minimum temperature of -. °C at Loch Glascarnoch, whilst England recorded -. °C at Topcliffe in North Yorkshire." Brr! But it pays to have a bit of a look around. Did you know that during the very same night, parts of Western Greenland hit plus  Celsius? That's more than  degrees Celsius warmer than Wales! The reason for that remarkable difference in temperature was the weather. An elongated and slow-moving area of high pressure was situated in the North Atlantic, extending up into the Arctic. As a consequence, because air flows around high pressure systems in a clockwise direction, on the high's left flank warm air was being dragged up into normally chilly Western Greenland. But down its right flank there came cold Arctic air, surging southwards towards Europe, hence those unusually low temperatures. It's easy to confuse current weather events with long-term climate trends. It's a bit like being at the beach, trying to figure out if the tide is rising or falling just by watching two or three individual waves roll in and out. The slow change of the tide is masked by the constant churning of the waves. Watch for - minutes and you should get a much better idea. In a similar way, the normal ups and downs of local weather can often mask slow changes in global climate. To find climate trends you need to look at how weather is changing over a longer time span. Looking at high and low temperature data from recent decades shows that new record highs occur nearly twice as often as new record lows. New records for cold weather will continue to be set (although that -C for Wales in November  will take some beating), but global warming's gradual influence will make them increasingly rare. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments Hotter ocean temperatures from global warming likely increased Idalia’s destructive power by at least -% Posted on  September  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Yale Climate Connections by Jeff Masters Hurricane Idalia charged ashore into Florida’s Big Bend coast on Wednesday morning, Aug. , as a powerful high-end Category  storm with  mph winds, bringing an extremely dangerous storm surge, destructive winds, and torrential rains to an area unused to major hurricanes. The story of Idalia’s devastation has yet to be written, but there is little doubt that human-caused climate change will be identified as a key contributor. Hurricanes are heat engines that take heat energy out of the ocean and convert it to the kinetic energy of their winds. A hotter ocean will allow hurricanes to grow more powerful, assuming that the other factors that power hurricanes, including low wind shear and a moist atmosphere, are present. As far back as , MIT hurricane scientist Kerry Emanuel theorized that the wind speeds in hurricanes can be expected to increase about % for every one degree Celsius (.°F) increase in tropical ocean temperature, assuming that the average wind speed near the surface of the tropical oceans does not change. Computer modeling has found a slightly smaller magnitude (%) for the increase. A -% increase in hurricane winds may not seem like a big deal, but damage from a hurricane increases exponentially with an increase in winds. For example, according to NOAA, a Category  hurricane with  mph winds will do  times the damage of a Category  hurricane with  mph winds. This includes damage not only from winds, but also from storm surge, inland flooding, and tornadoes. Bottom line: A -% increase in winds yields about a -% increase in the destructive potential of a hurricane (Figure ). Figure . Damage multiplier for hurricane winds compared to a minimal Category  hurricane with  mph winds. A doubling of the wind speed from  mph to  mph increases potential damage by a factor of . (Image credit: NOAA) Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  September  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Sep ,  thru Sat, Sep , . Story of the Week Lee adds to a growing trend of intense hurricanes powered by warmer oceans Source: NOAA's National Hurricane Center Hurricane Lee rapidly intensified at a historic pace into a Category  storm Thursday night, adding to a spate of extremely intense hurricanes this year and in recent decades which experts say is a symptom of the climate crisis. Lee is now the eighth Category  storm in the North Atlantic since , which means % of Category  hurricanes on record in the basin have occurred in the last seven years, a CNN analysis of NOAA’s hurricane database shows. This year alone, Category  storms have already appeared in all seven ocean basins where tropical cyclones form, including Hurricane Jova, which also rapidly strengthened into a Category  storm earlier this week. “The increase in Category  or  storms, especially that we’ve seen over the last couple years due to the increase in rapid intensification, is a telltale sign of climate change, which is exactly what we expect to see in a warmer world,” Kevin Reed, a hurricane expert and professor at Stony Brook University’s school of marine and atmospheric sciences, told CNN. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on the CNN website. Lee adds to a growing trend of intense hurricanes powered by warmer oceans by Rachel Ramirez, Weather, CNN, Sep ,  Read more  comments Exploring the feasibility of a new feature: Bunk of the Week Posted on  September  by BaerbelW We'd like to improve our agility for dealing with newly-emergent climate misinformation, revisitation of old claims by people in general, and misinformers on platforms with high potential for causing harm. So, we're exploring publishing a weekly feature, with the working title "Bunk of the Week." We'd appreciate and value your help in shaping our direction. If you care to help, please answer the following questions via this Google form: Would a "bunk of the week" be helpful? Yes No Don't Know What would you like to see debunked? Specific agenda-driven misinforming articles social media posts etc. with high profile Misinformation frequently repeated by many people in a variety of contexts News-driven topical and "trendy" misinformation Novel, unfamiliar climate misinformation Do you have current examples? What could such a feature be called? Question # invites "other" and we'd like to know your thoughts on that as well. For question # we are looking for current examples of what you'd like to see debunked. For any selected category, some samples would be helpful. For now, this is just to gather information to get a better handle on how much "input" there is readily available to feed into such a weekly publication. Therefore, please don't expect any actual debunkings for your submissions right away (sorry about that!). "Bunk of the Week" is our working title but there might be better ones. If you have a suggestion for another title please let us know in response to question #. Thanks for your help and filling out the short Google form! Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  September  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables Included in this week's governmentNGO section the World Meteorological Organization has released its annual retrospective of our previous year's climate situation, State of the Climate in  (pdf): “While greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise and the climate continues to change, populations worldwide continue to be gravely impacted by extreme weather and climate events. For example, in , continuous drought in East Africa, record breaking rainfall in Pakistan and record-breaking heatwaves in China and Europe affected tens of millions, drove food insecurity, boosted mass migration, and cost billions of dollars in loss and damage.” — WMO Secretary-General Prof. Petteri Taalas. Also in this week's governmentNGO roundup, Wildfire Misinformation: Arson Claims Set the Climate Debate Ablaze (pdf), from Climate Action Against Disinformation. Via Geophysical Research Letters, a concerning report suggesting that our climate models are likely undershooting what we may well see in the not-so-distant future in Antarctica. In The Largest Ever Recorded Heatwave—Characteristics and Attribution of the Antarctic Heatwave of March , Blanchard-Wigglesworth et al. report: The March  Antarctic heatwave registered the warmest temperature anomaly on record, and resulted from extreme atmospheric heat fluxes A widely used climate model cannot simulate equivalent events in a large ensemble, a bias that is improved after nudging its winds to observations The thermodynamic amplification of the heatwave by climate change was °C, and equivalent heatwaves may warm a further –°C by  The latter finding means that the interior East Antarctica icecap may see near-melting temperatures toward the end of this century. The authors report success with helping models at least approximate what reality has already delivered, but much needs to be done to gain confidence. To a jaded eye steeped in a thick soup of rubbishy climate propaganda, it seems as though there's something important missing in Why don’t Americans trust university researchers and why it matters for climate change, just published in PLOS Climate. Authors Alvarez, Debnath & Ebanks report results and analysis of a sizeable (N=,) representative sample of residents of the United States, seeking to determine what shapes public perceptions of the reliability of the academic community in the minds of the public when we think about climate science. Specifically, the survey elicits: i) How is trust in science associated with belief in the importance of climate change as a problem? ii) How is trust in science associated with beliefs about whether climate change is caused by humans or nature? iii) Who trusts university research centers? Findings are familiar, broadly replicating previous associations between trust in science and ideological alignments. With these results in hand, the authors offer suggestions: First, more research must be done to understand who trusts or distrusts university research on climate change and who is persuadable. Second, more research is needed on climate communication framing and messaging. Third, additional research on appropriate messaging is necessary. Finally, we need to develop a culture of trust in climate research and how it is communicated across society. What's missing? Accounting for widely broadcast and consumed synthetic climate bunk. Investigation and resultant suggestions of this kind are disordered in the same sense that attempting to inflate a leaking tire without seeing the puncture causing the leak will lead to enduring puzzlement over the tire's failure to obediently inflate and stay that way. The beliefs of Americans about climate science and climate scientists are buffeted and battered by a concerted, multi-decade industrialized (and industrial) misinformation and disinformation campaign (Treen et al. , see numerous others in cites therein). It's principally for this reason that Skeptical Science and our colleagues exist. Sampling without "why do you believe this" andor "who told you so" arguably leads to a myopic, impoverished perspective of the public mental landscape. It seems reasonable to suppose that attempts to understand and foster trust in researchers involved in matters to do with climate must take into account active measures engaged in destroying that trust, or risk mysterious failure. The information in the authors' study is of course useful, but it leads to an all-too familiar conclusion, akin to a victim of a battering relationship chronically stuck at the stage of "what can -I- do to please the person beating me so they'll stop," even when cause is not personal to the victim. This itself is a framing of belief the climate science community might do well to keep in frame, lest communications become needlessly distorted in pursuit of impossible goals. The Journal of Enivronmental Psychology brings us Conspiracy theories and climate change: A systematic review, by Tam and Chan. As advertised, the authors collate previous research on the connection between conspiracy ideation and conspiratorial beliefs about climate change. Some studies take unfamiliar directions, such as finding penetration of typical partisanideological boundaries. With what's been accomplished gathered together, omissions become easier to see and Tam and Chan produce a list of promising avenues for gap-filling and further understanding. Some of their questions are in fact germane to our remarks above about Alvarez et al. The paper is not least a great way to get a holistic grip on this weird feature of climate cognition.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects A Regime Shift on Weddell Sea Continental Shelves with Local and Remote Physical and Biogeochemical Implications is Avoidable in a °C Scenario, Nissen et al., Journal of Climate Open Access pdf .jcli-d--. Atmospheric Latent Energy Transport Pathways into the Arctic and Their Connections to Sea Ice Loss during Winter over the Observational Period, Liang et al., Journal of Climate .jcli-d--. Atmospheric Response to a Collapse of the North Atlantic Circulation under a Mid-Range Future Climate Scenario: A Regime Shift in Northern Hemisphere Dynamics, Orbe et al., Journal of Climate Open Access .jcli-d--. Read more  comments The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle: Downloads and Translations Posted on  September  by BaerbelW Published in January , The Teachers' Guide to Cranky Uncle offers background information and classroom activity ideas for educators interested in using the Cranky Uncle game to teach critical thinking in their classes. The Cranky Uncle game builds resilience against misinformation and strengthens players’ critical thinking. It achieves this through inoculation—explaining the rhetorical techniques used to mislead. The denial techniques in the game are built on the five techniques of science denial outlined in the FLICC framework. One of the activities in the Teachers’ Guide is the Please Don’t Fail Me assignment, designed by Melanie Trecek-King from Thinking is Power. Melanie has also written a blog post going into greater detail into this assignment and how students responded. Other suggested activities include Introduction to FLICC Walk-through game Roleplaying Have students create misinformation Debunking misinformation  and more Translations Read more  comments At a glance - Is CO a pollutant? Posted on  September  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "Is CO a pollutant?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance If you look up the definition of pollution in a dictionary, you will soon realise it's rather subjective. There are many substances out there that are harmless at certain levels but harmful at others. Carbon dioxide is well-mixed in our atmosphere. That's because when it is emitted, by any mechanism from a vehicle exhaust to a volcanic eruption, it stays in the air for many years. Unlike water, it does not condense and fall back out as rain. Turbulence does a splendid job of mixing it evenly into the air. But there are places on - and in - Earth where much higher concentrations of CO may be encountered. The trouble with CO is that it cannot be seen and neither can it be smelt. In other words we cannot detect it from a safe distance. In caves and mines, high concentrations of CO are a well-known hazard. They can result from things like rotting timber, oxidising coal and particularly by poor ventilation, where that mixing into the air fails to occur. Because CO is heavier than air, in poorly ventilated areas underground it may collect into pockets waiting for the unwary. Miners or underground explorers breathing a higher than normal concentration of CO will experience gradually increasing ill effects. It depends on the concentration of the gas. For example the UK Health and Safety Executive has defined safe CO limits for the workplace. The limit for long-term exposure is .% (, ppm) but for shorter encounters it is %. Anything over that figure is regarded as a risk to human health. There have been many accidents and fatalities over the years caused by high concentrations of CO in underground workings and to a lesser extent in caves. Coal-miners refer to CO as black- or choke-damp in recognition of the hazard. Possibly the worst CO-related disaster was that of  August  at Lake Nyos, in northwestern Cameroon in western Central Africa. The lake, only some  x  km in size but more than  m deep, is one of a number of flooded volcanic vents in a sporadically-active volcanic belt. Carbon dioxide-bearing springs are common in this area and some are present in the lake-bed. Lake Nyos is typically stratified, meaning that normally its waters occur in distinct layers with different chemistry that do not normally mix. In something of a loaded gun scenario, the bottom layer used to become saturated with CO from those lake-bed springs. On st August , something caused an overturning of the lake, meaning the deep CO-saturated water headed for the surface. Like taking the top off a shaken-up pop bottle, a vast cloud of CO was instantly released and travelled out from the lake along the ground. At least , people and , livestock died instantly from asphyxiation. Modern technology and international cooperation have since been successful in controlling the build-up of CO in lakes like Nyos. But clearly, in specific circumstances, CO is as deadly a pollutant as any other. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments John F. Clauser: the latest climate science-denying physicist Posted on  September  by dana It’s a familiar story – the physicist who draws attention for declaring that climate scientists have got climate science all wrong. He (it’s always a ‘he’) was born before color television was invented, usually retired, perhaps having won a Nobel Prize, but with zero climate science research or expertise. William Happer. Ivar Giaever. Roger Cohen. Freeman Dyson. Steven Koonin. Robert Laughlin. The latest example from this mould is John F. Clauser. Although Clauser has never published any peer-reviewed climate science research, he has made several climate-related claims whose veracity we will examine below. Yes, humans are responsible for the increase in CO In a July  interview with the Epoch Times, Clauser claimed that the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO) “may or may not be made by human beings. It doesn't really matter where it comes from.” That's a bit like saying, "I don't know what atoms are made of, but it doesn't really matter. Let me tell you why particle physics is all wrong." In reality, several lines of evidence have proven the incontrovertible fact that the human combustion of fossil fuels – which today releases nearly  billion tons of CO per year – is entirely responsible for the % increase in Earth’s atmospheric CO concentrations since the Industrial Revolution. For example, there’s basic accounting: those  billion tons of CO have to go somewhere, and Earth’s natural sinks like the oceans and biosphere only absorb about half of those emissions. The other half ends up in the atmosphere, as explained in the Denialx video below. And atmospheric carbon isotope ratio measurements also demonstrate that the CO increase is coming from ancient plant matter, a.k.a. fossil fuels. Anyone who understands even the most basic aspects of climate science should not question such a simple and thoroughly-established fact. Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  September  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Aug ,  thru Sat, Sep , . Story of the Week Falsehoods Follow Close Behind This Summer’s Natural Disasters Misattributed videos, recycled lies and warped fears are fueling unfounded claims about the recent record-breaking heat, floods and wildfires. As natural disasters and extreme environmental conditions became more commonplace around the world this summer, scientists pointed repeatedly to a shared driver: climate change. Conspiracy theorists pointed to anything but. Some claimed falsely that the record-smashing heat waves blistering parts of North America, Europe and Asia were normal, and that they had been sensationalized as part of a globalist hoax. Others made up tales that cloud-seeding airplanes or a nearby dam, rather than torrential rains, had caused the unusually intense flooding in northern Italy (and in places like Vermont and Rwanda). The devastating wildfire on Maui this month produced especially ludicrous claims. Social media that racked up millions of views blamed the blaze on a “directed energy weapon” (the evidence: years-old footage not recorded in Hawaii). And as Florida braced this week for Hurricane Idalia, some people claimed incorrectly online that such storms are not affected by fossil fuel emissions. The unfounded claims that now regularly follow natural disasters and dangerous weather, contradicting a preponderance of scientific evidence, can often seem frivolous and fantastical. They persist, however — attracting large audiences and frustrating climate experts, who say the world has little time to evade a global warming catastrophe. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on The New York Times website. Falsehoods Follow Close Behind This Summer’s Natural Disasters Misattributed videos, recycled lies and warped fears are fueling unfounded claims about the recent record-breaking heat, floods and wildfires. by Tiffany Hsu, Media, New York Times, Aug ,  Read more  comments From Knowledge to Power - an interview with John Perona: scientist, author, and blogger Posted on  September  by BaerbelW A short while ago John Perona got in touch to make us aware of his weekly newsletter „Earthward“ and his website „From Knowledge to Power“. We found it to be another resource with some mission similarities to Skeptical Science but with a strong identity of its own, and powerful content with a more policy-centric approach. As we were excited to learn about John’s website, we collaborated with him for this interview-style blog post to learn more about his background and how his site came to be. Could you please tell us a bit about your science background? I’m an academic research scientist by profession, originally trained as a quantitative biochemist specializing in enzyme structure-function relationships and especially the interactions of protein enzymes with DNA and RNA. However, I also had the good fortune to spend childhood summers in the Italian Alps with my extended family, and this is probably what catalyzed my lifelong passion for the outdoors that is now expressed in my climate work. It took me a long time, but after I earned tenure I started shifting my emphasis toward environmental problems. On the research side, my students and I began studying some unusual enzymes from methanogens, the microorganisms that generate all the biologically derived methane on Earth. After moving from California to Portland, Oregon, we learned how to culture methanogens in our lab and eventually discovered a metabolic pathway that allows these cells to assimilate reduced forms of sulfur in anaerobic environments lacking oxygen. Are you involved with volunteer organizations active in the climate space? Outside the lab, I got very interested in the efforts of a small nonprofit law firm, the Environmental Defense Center, to hold the oil industry to account for damages caused by offshore oil and gas drilling in the Santa Barbara channel. Later, in Portland, my interests in this and other environmental issues led me into the formal study of environmental law and eventually also to work as a citizen advocate for a healthy climate. I volunteered for many years with the Citizens’ Climate Lobby (CCL), advocating for an economy-wide carbon tax, and more recently have engaged with other advocates in Oregon to help influence the state legislature to pass laws promoting renewable energy. What is the main focus of your book “From Knowledge to Power”? From Knowledge to Power (KP), was published in November  and is a comprehensive handbook covering climate science, policy, politics and citizen advocacy in the US. It’s written for laypersons who want to get involved in healthy climate advocacy and is also suitable as a text for adult education and university audiences. The book is much more detailed than other works on climate science for a general audience - but I became convinced, through my advocacy, that there is demand for a more rigorous treatment that helps advocates build a secure knowledge base, which they can use to be more effective in their work to influence government and business leaders. KP starts with a heavy emphasis on climate science and covers all the key issues on the energy balance, carbon cycle, models and projections, and impacts. Readers of Skeptical Science will be familiar with the main denialist arguments, and these are integrated (together with rebuttals) into the early science chapters. The book then moves into a short interlude describing energy transition roadmaps and a chapter on fossil fuels, which includes the politics of disinformation campaigns by fossil fuel companies. The last four chapters are on renewable energy technology and policy, interspersed with opportunities for advocacy. There’s also a dedicated chapter on advocacy with a nonpartisan focus, explaining how progressives and conservatives alike can find a home in the advocacy movement. Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  August  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Open access notables In this week's governmentNGO reports section, another rapid assessment by World Weather Attribution, an outfit dedicated to keeping us informed of the impacts of climate change on weather events happening around us right now. WWA's new report Climate change more than doubled the likelihood of extreme fire weather conditions in Eastern Canada finds: Climate change made the cumulative severity of Québec’s  fire season to the end of July around % more intense, and seasons of this severity at least seven times more likely to occur. Peak fire weather like that experienced this year is at least twice as likely, and the intensity has increased by about % due to human-induced climate change. Even for folks who don't care about others, making sure everybody is taken care of as we deal with the root cause of our burgeoning climate threat is a matter of plain old enlightened self-interest. Creating an angry crowd characterized and differentiated from ourselves by deprivation isn't smart— we can't ask the Romanovs but we can guess what they'd tell us about that. With concentrated reliance on prior research, Net-zero transitions for all? Considering applications in Asia by So-Young Lee and published in Sustainability Science lays out the the history and risks of transition left-behinds, painting a concerning picture but leaving us with a ray of hope founded in a reality created by better choices: As the only country to achieve net-zero so far, Bhutan’s invention of the Gross National Happiness Index is a timely reminder that putting people and societies at the heart of the climate narrative can generate positive outcomes for generations to come. Thinking in averages and means tends to hide important details of individual circumstances. Rapid increase in the risk of heat-related mortality, Lüthi et al., Nature Communications: Current research focuses largely on how heat mortality increases with mean global temperature rise, but it is unclear how much climate change will increase the frequency and severity of extreme summer seasons with high impact on human health. In this probabilistic analysis, we combined empirical heat-mortality relationships for  locations from  countries with climate model large ensemble data to identify probable past and future highly impactful summer seasons. Across most locations, heat mortality counts of a -in- year season in the climate of  would be expected once every ten to twenty years in the climate of . These return periods are projected to further shorten under warming levels of . °C and  °C, where heat-mortality extremes of the past climate will eventually become commonplace if no adaptation occurs. The effectiveness of moderating harmful online content by Phillipp Schneider and Marian-Andrei Rizolu publishing in PNAS finds that social network moderation efforts have a significant positive effect on limiting the what the authors term the "content half-life" of bunk and hate appearing online. With the hashtag "#climatescam" as one of two main test articles, the paper is close to Skeptical Science's home. In Earth's Future, Yesterday's High Tide Is Today's New Normal by Christopher Piecuch and Benjamin Hamlington makes a simple but thought-provoking point with broad implications: tidal datums employed for many purposes are not keeping up with events we've caused: Given the rapid pace of sea-level rise in the United States (Sweet et al., ), official definitions of tidal heights based on historical observations no longer correspond to the daily water levels typically experienced today. This presents legal and political challenges, but perhaps more basically it illustrates how fundamentally and quickly our collective experience of the coast has changed: coastal elevations that only decades ago were recognized as mean higher high water, inundated only acutely during storms or peak seasonal full- or new-moon tides, are now (or will soon be) experienced as mean sea level, underwater as often as not (Figure ). This has profound implications for how we live, work, and play by the sea, and provides a stark demonstration of how sea-level rise is redefining the American shore. From the "decarbonization" section, let's finish up with an excellent review article giving cause for some optimism: Wu et al. in Carbon Neutralization, with Cathode materials for calcium-ion batteries: Current status and prospects and introducing the notion of the "post-lithium-ion-battery era." The authors point out that lithium resources will be exhausted in a very few decades at the rate we're going (let alone being quite problematic in other ways), so a move to other much more abundant light metals is a welcome prospect. The authors lay out a course of solid progress.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects Contemporary oceanic radiocarbon response to ocean circulation changes, Pookkandy et al., Climate Dynamics Open Access pdf .s--- Dynamics of localized extreme heatwaves in the mid-latitude atmosphere: A conceptual examination, Rostami et al., Atmospheric Science Letters Open Access pdf .asl. Joint optimization of land carbon uptake and albedo can help achieve moderate instantaneous and long-term cooling effects, Graf et al., Communications Earth & Environment Open Access pdf .s--- Marine heatwave as a supercharger for the strongest typhoon in the East China Sea, Pun et al., npj Climate and Atmospheric Science Open Access pdf .s--- On the recent increase in Atlantic Ocean hurricane activity and influencing factors, Moharana & Swain, Natural Hazards .s--- Read more  comments How is climate change affecting China’s cropland? Posted on  August  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Carbon Brief by Wanyuan Song Chinese agriculture has not had an easy year. Official data shows that at least .m hectares (,km) or % of wheat land in China have been affected by a sustained spate of rains – with “agricultural challenges” set to continue throughout the rest of the year.” The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and World Bank both stress that further loss and damage is expected across China’s farming sector as global temperatures continue to rise. But what, specifically, is happening to China’s arable land? And how does China plan to minimise the negative impacts of climate change on its wider food system? In this Q&A, Carbon Brief looks at China’s cropland policies. What challenges does Chinese farming face under climate change? What impact will climate change have on China’s food security? How much arable land does China have? How will China balance food security with forestry and renewable energy? What challenges does Chinese farming face under climate change? In , China suffered from its worst heatwave and drought in six decades. The ministry of agriculture and rural affairs stated at a press conference last August that the agricultural sector was facing “growing risks” as a result of extreme weather and shifting planting conditions brought about by climate change. This summer, severe drought continued to affect China in June and July, while a torrent of floods brought on by typhoons followed in August. The heavy rains have destroyed corn and rice crops in north China, while in central China’s Henan province more than m tonnes of wheat were lost in June alone. Although the agriculture ministry insists the country has experienced a “summer harvest”, the summer’s grain output decreased .bn jin (.m tonnes) from last year’s total of m tonnes. However, the US department of agriculture predicts that  may not end up being a poor harvest year for China. Only sunflower seeds, barley and cotton are likely to see a reduction in production. The output of main crops, including corn, rice and wheat, would surpass the average output of the past five years. Read more  comments At a glance - How much is sea level rising? Posted on  August  by John Mason, BaerbelW On February ,  we announced our Rebuttal Update Project. This included an ask for feedback about the added "At a glance" section in the updated basic rebuttal versions. This weekly blog post series highlights this new section of one of the updated basic rebuttal versions and serves as a "bump" for our ask. This week features "How much is sea level rising?". More will follow in the upcoming weeks. Please follow the Further Reading link at the bottom to read the full rebuttal and to join the discussion in the comment thread there. At a glance You'd think it would be obvious, wouldn't you? If ice (or snow) melts, you get water. Water flows downhill through gravity and collects wherever it can be retained. In areas that see regular winter snowfalls, the processes involved are familiar. Snow-capped mountains look photogenic but along comes the eventual thaw and the river levels rise sharply with all the meltwater. Now apply the same basic principles to glaciers and ice-caps. It should not come as a surprise that exactly the same thing happens and where that meltwater collects is ultimately the oceans. Note here that we're talking about land-based ice, not sea-ice: sea-ice is already part of the ocean so does not affect sea levels as it forms and melts every year. But melt enough land-ice and you get very significant change indeed. What do we mean by very significant? Well, let's look at the transition out of the last ice-age that dominated the last , years. It began with ice-caps over parts of Europe and North America and ended not so long ago with much of that ice gone but with sea levels having risen by more than  metres. If that's not significant, what is? There's not enough ice left on Earth to raise sea levels by that whopping amount now, but there is enough to raise the oceans by more than  metres. Over what sort of time-frame? Well, we know that the current rate of sea level rise is some . mm a year, or nearly an inch and a half per decade. A lot of that is due to the expansion of the oceans - as things are warmed up they expand. But the rate is accelerating. How fast do we think it can get? We do have the past to consider: during the glacial meltdown of the past , years, there was a period ominously named Meltwater Pulse A that began some , years ago. During this enhanced period of melting, sea levels rose by between  and  metres in about – years. That's roughly – mm per year or - inches a decade. Could such drastic rates of sea level rise happen again? Probably not but nevertheless it shows what is possible as ice-sheets collapse in a warming world. But even if sea level rise stays at its current rate (it won't), that's getting on for a two-metre increase over the coming  years and a one-half to one-metre increase over the next  years. Now go anywhere affected by tides and think about all the communities of people that live and work along the shore. Pick the biggest spring tides, take a look at where they reach at high water, maybe watch the waves and surge when a storm occurs, then imagine an extra two metres of water on top of that. And try to imagine being the decision-makers in the coming decades and centuries, who will have to work out what best to do. What would you think of the people all those years ago, who went around pretending this was not happening? Not favourably, for sure - because of such behaviour, that is how history will remember them. Please use this form to provide feedback about this new "At a glance" section. Read a more technical version below or dig deeper via the tabs above Click for Further details Read more  comments Eastern Canada wildfires: Climate change doubled likelihood of ‘extreme fire weather’ Posted on  August  by Guest Author This is a re-post from Carbon Brief by Ayesha Tandon The unusually hot and dry weather that drove record-breaking wildfires in eastern Canada was made at least two times more likely by human-caused climate change, according to a new rapid attribution study. Canada is experiencing its most severe wildfire season in recorded history this year. Wildfires have burned more than m hectares ( acres) of land, forcing thousands of people to evacuate and sending up billowing plumes of smoke that have reached as far as New York. Around % of Canada’s total forest area has burned this year. The wildfires have already doubled the previous records for burned area and carbon emissions, and the wildfire season is not over yet. There are more than , active fires nationwide, two-thirds of which are classed as out of control. “The word ‘unprecedented’ doesn’t do justice to the severity of the wildfires in Canada this year,” an author on the study warns. He adds that “from a scientific perspective, the doubling of the previous burned area record is shocking”. The “unusually” hot and dry weather conditions were important drivers of the unprecedented wildfires, the World Weather Attribution service finds. The “peak fire weather” seen in eastern Canada over May-July this year was at least two times more likely and % more intense due to human-induced climate change, the study finds. It warns that as the climate warms, “fire-prone weather” will become more likely. Read more  comments  SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup # Posted on  August  by John Hartz A chronological listing of news and opinion articles posted on the Skeptical Science Facebook Page during the past week: Sun, Aug ,  thru Sat, Aug , . Story of the Week Scientific journal retracts article that claimed no evidence of climate crisis Publisher Springer Nature says  article ‘not supported by available evidence’ as editors launch investigation One of the world’s biggest scientific publishers has retracted a journal article that claimed to have found no evidence of a climate crisis. Springer Nature said it had retracted the article, by four Italian physicists, after an internal investigation found the conclusions were “not supported by available evidence or data provided by the authors”. Climate sceptic groups widely publicised the article, which appeared in the European Physical Journal Plus in January  – a journal not known for publishing climate change science. Nine months later the article was reported uncritically in a page one story in the Australian newspaper and promoted in two segments on Sky News Australia – a channel that has been described as a global hub for climate science misinformation. The segments were viewed more than , times on YouTube. The article claimed to have analysed data to find no trend in rainfall extremes, floods, droughts and food productivity. “In conclusion on the basis of observational data, the climate crisis that, according to many sources, we are experiencing today, is not evident yet,” the article said. Several climate scientists told the Guardian and later the news agency AFP that the article had misrepresented some scientific articles, was “selective and biased” and had “cherrypicked” information. Click here to access the entire article as originally posted on The Guardian website. Scientific journal retracts article that claimed no evidence of climate crisis Publisher Springer Nature says  article ‘not supported by available evidence’ as editors launch investigation by Graham Readfearn, Environment, The Guardian, Aug ,  Read more  comments Skeptical Science New Research for Week #  Posted on  August  by Doug Bostrom, Marc Kodack Publication accident report There are not  hours in a day and so we're unable to cover all scientific journals, instead must restrict surveillance to those most likely to include climate-relevant results. Thus our weekly compendium did not include the paper "A critical assessment of extreme events trends in times of global warming," published in Springer-Nature's European Physical Journal Plus back in January of  and authored by Alimonti et al. The paper has just been retracted, with its residual value now lying in (re)learning lessons about how the peer review process can and does sometimes fail, and how to avoid such harm. Although the main failure modes in play with this bobble are not new and thus a bit irritating to report, as with any accident investigation the worth of retrospection isn't in blame-casting but rather "see and avoid" in the future. How did we get here, and how do we steer around such trouble? It's a lot about recognizing division of "pilot workload, applying "cockpit resource management," and disciplined self-assessment of skills. When those systems fail, factors normally not problematic may stack up and turn into a harmful accident. A sign of trouble with this work that should have been identified early: the author team were practicing outside of their normal individual disciplines. While not itself a reason to summarily desk-reject a submission, this should have alerted editors and then appropriately selected reviewers to the need for especially careful attention to the authors' methods, analysis and conclusions. But this brings us to a more glaring problem: the stable of reviewers for European Physical Journal Plus wasn't actually suited for assessing and critiquing this paper. Yet for whatever reason neither the journal's editorial team nor the reviewers chose to admit this and send the paper looking elsewhere for better, suitably competent treatment. This latter failure might be termed the "root cause" of the ensuing publication accident. Another clue of severe turbulence ahead could have been missed by anybody: two authors were signatories to the so-called "World Climate Declaration," a sort of OISM Petition on steroids designed to create an aura of authority while presenting an entirely fictitious picture of the actual state of Earth's climate as it's affected by human activities. Easy to miss, but a clear indication of motivated reasoning likely in play given the declaration's alienation from scientific consensus and consilience on basic functioning of Earth's climate. Barreling through all safety barriers the paper was accepted for publication, setting the stage for a hearty helping of humiliation for journal and authors alike— and for more general delusion of the public mind. Meanwhile, climate contrarians live in an environment of starvation when it comes to supporting work published in legitimate journals; Alimonti et al. was eagerly devoured in certain circles when it duly appeared in print, gaining thereby a smidgeon of notoriety. As a side note, one can't help but remark the astoundingly specialized diet of deniers. Presented with a dish of publications including literally thousands of nuggets of information kibble per year, they reliably sort and reject everything that doesn't comport with prior beliefs, seize on and gobble down the single nibble that tastes "right." It's a failing we all share but especially prominent here. Now following a familiar trajectory (horse out of the barn), thanks to grateful climate "skeptics" boosting its profile the paper attracted attention of domain experts, essentially the reviewers who ideally should have been those assigned the review task prior to publication. Belatedly doing what might better have come before, the journal conducted a more intensive review of the work. The authors were offered an opportunity to salvage their claims but failed to rise to the occasion. So, the paper is now retracted by European Physical Journal Plus and everybody involved ends up a bit bruised and battered. May their pain not be wasted. Notably, whatever state of misinformation will have been created by the paper's circulation outside of the academic sphere will be essentially impossible to fully remedy. The publication process crash has created a little crater in our overall betterment. In remarks to Agence France-Presse, Stefan Rahmstorf of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research noted that targeting of a vulnerable journal is "a common avenue taken by 'climate skeptics' in order to avoid peer review by real experts in the field." Embarrassment for all is the result but we can be consoled that while lamentably slow and working elliptically, "the system worked." And we can thank Alimonti et al. for providing a valuable skills-building opportunity for the victim journal. There's now less excuse for such a pratfall. We've seen this evolution before— there's no need to repeat it.  articles in  journals by  contributing authors Physical science of climate change, effects Convective Self-Aggregation Occurs Without Radiative Feedbacks in Warm Climates, Yao & Yang Yang, Geophysical Research Letters Open Access pdf .gl Nonlinearity of the cloud response postpones climate penalty of mitigating air pollution in polluted regions, Jia & Quaas, Nature Climate Change Open Access pdf .s--- Role of Horizontal Heat Advection in Arctic Surface Warming During Early Spring, Dai, Geophysical Research Letters Open Access pdf .gl Unexpected cooling February during global-warming slowdown: Focusing on the mid–high latitudes of Eurasia, Chen et al., Atmospheric Research .j.atmosres.. Observations of climate change, effects Changes of the streamflow of northern river basins of Siberia and their teleconnections to climate patterns, Zhang et al., International Journal of Climatology Open Access pdf .joc. Read more  comments ClimateAdam: The Vlog Brothers on geoengineering Posted on  August  by Guest Author This video includes conclusions of the creator climate scientist Dr. Adam Levy. It is presented to our readers as an informed perspective. Please see video description for references (if any). On his latest video for the Vlog Brothers, Hank Green spoke about the accidental experiment that cleaning up ship fuel has carried out on the climate, in a video titled "The Biggest Science Story of the Week". Among other things, Hank argues that this could be a crucial opportunity to learn about geoengineering. Geoengineering - according to this Vlog Brother - could be a "giant step forward". So what could geoengineering actually achieve to combat climate change? And why are many climate scientists far more skeptical than Hank lets on? Huge thanks to Miriam for her contribution. Check out her channel here: @zenturo. Support ClimateAdam on patreon: https:patreon.comclimateadam Read more  comments The Consensus Project Website THE ESCALATOR (free to republish) © Copyright  John Cook Home | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us 
 Climate Analysis & Renewables News – Platform Skip to content Popular News Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio Wind in My Community The Basics of Wind Energy What is Biomass Energy? Community Solar Power Explained Solar Energy: Why Go Solar? Is Solar Energy a Solution for Climate Change? Bio-Energy Incompatible with Sustainable Production Study Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild A Look Back at Global Warming in  follow us Home Renewable Climate Solar Energy Wind Energy BIO Energy About Subscribe Contact Search Search for: trending latest Solar Energy Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio August , March ,  Wind Energy Wind in My Community January , February ,  Wind Energy The Basics of Wind Energy January , February ,  BIO Energy What is Biomass Energy? January , February ,  Solar Energy Community Solar Power Explained January , February ,  Solar Energy Solar Energy: Why Go Solar? January , February ,  Solar Energy Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio August , March ,  Renewable Energy The Ultimate Guide to  Renewable Energy Sources January , February ,  BIO Energy Modern Bio-Energy Critical Meeting Global Climate Change Goals January , February ,  Climate Change A Look Back at Global Warming in  January , February ,  Renewable Energy Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild January , February ,  BIO Energy Bio-Energy Incompatible with Sustainable Production Study January , February ,  Solar Energy Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio August , March ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio Wind Energy Wind in My Community January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Wind in My Community Wind Energy The Basics of Wind Energy January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on The Basics of Wind Energy BIO Energy What is Biomass Energy? January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on What is Biomass Energy? Solar Energy Community Solar Power Explained January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Community Solar Power Explained Solar Energy Solar Energy: Why Go Solar? January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Solar Energy: Why Go Solar? Solar Energy Is Solar Energy a Solution for Climate Change? January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Is Solar Energy a Solution for Climate Change? BIO Energy Bio-Energy Incompatible with Sustainable Production Study January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Bio-Energy Incompatible with Sustainable Production Study Renewable Energy Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild Climate Change A Look Back at Global Warming in  January , February ,  Debra Quick Leave a Comment on A Look Back at Global Warming in  Search for: Latest News How Does A Solar-Powered Radio Work? Three Environmental Benefits of Wind Energy Solar-Powered Radio Vs. Normal Radio Silicon for Lithium Batteries Moves to Commercial Production Solar Radio: The DIY Steps to Make One SubscribePlease enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form.Name *FirstLastEmail *Submit Renewble Energy News View All Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild January , February ,  Debra QuickLeave a Comment on Implementing Ways to Support Renewable Energy that Protects the Wild The Ultimate Guide to  Renewable Energy Sources January , February ,  Wind Energy View All Wind in My Community If you are familiar with a community solar project, you […] January , February ,  Debra QuickLeave a Comment on Wind in My Community The Basics of Wind Energy Wind energy is basically energy derived from wind that can […] January , February ,  Debra QuickLeave a Comment on The Basics of Wind Energy Climate In Depth How Does A Solar-Powered Radio Work? A simple solar-powered radio works with a small solar panel, radio, alligator clips, and a charge controller. The panel harvests solar power from direct sunlight, which charges the solar batteries. The latter, in turn. stores solar energy to power the battery. The charge controller regulates the amount of charge to the battery to prevent overcharging. In the s, General Electric invented the first solar-powered radio. The solar radio is a battery-less radio that works by connecting the solar panel to the battery terminals of the radio. The radio has been an essential means of communication … Read More Three Environmental Benefits of Wind Energy Wind energy is one of the sources of energy that are considered renewable. It is naturally occurring and totally accessible. Therefore, having an energy system that harnesses the power of wind can greatly contribute to the sustainability of electricity and to the preservation of the environment. . Reduction Of Carbon Footprint and Greenhouse Gases Wind energy systems rely solely on the power of the wind. Therefore, no fuels are burned, and no greenhouse gases are emitted. Compared to the output, the wind energy systems are significantly less than the coal-fired power plants but the carbon … Read More Silicon for Lithium Batteries Moves to Commercial Production A company in the US called Group Technologies has announced the start of construction of a factory capable of manufacturing  tons of silicon carbon-based anode material annually. This material is commonly used for lithium-ion batteries. The said factory will be situated at the headquarters of Group in Woodinville, Washington. It will serve as the first of many factories planned to be built by the company. Before we continue with the Group batteries, let’s watch the video below that talks about the energy density of silicon batteries compared to others. Group’s Batteries Group Technologies’ innovation, … Read More Solar Radio: The DIY Steps to Make One Ever wonder how solar saved the radio? Solar power is an innovative option for powering gadgets and devices, such as the radio. By learning the process, you could bring your radio anywhere with you, even in places with no electricity, or you only have a limited supply of batteries. Before learning the process, here’s a look at what you are trying to achieve. A solar-powered radio is a portable radio device getting its power source from photovoltaic panels. This kind of device was first introduced in the s as an experiment conducted by General Electric … Read More Increasing Renewable Energy It is already a no-brainer on the benefits of renewable energy resources to our planet and the society. It reduces reliance on energy resources that can cause pollution in all aspects. Aside from that, the wastes like ash from coal-fired industries and radioactive waste from nuclear power plants contribute to the volume of problematic trash to handle. Having infrastructures that can harness the renewable energy resources are increasing and come in all sizes. Solar energy systems can be large like the solar farms or personalized for rooftop installations. Wind mills are truly massive structures that … Read More Looking Back at How Climate Change Altered the World in  This year was filled with drastic changes that were mainly contributed by the coronavirus. As the health sector was affected, there was a climate crisis that led to unpredictable weather events. As industries and transportations took a break due to the imposed lockdowns rules, pollution decreased greatly. However, it is unfortunate that there was an increase in waste, specifically medical and residential waste. There can be no wonder that among the greenhouse gas emissions, NO, or nitrous oxide, has become more abundant with a -percent growth from  to . With most people staying at … Read More Bio Energy View All What is Biomass Energy? Basing on the etymology, the term ‘bio’ refers to living […] January , February ,  Bio-Energy Incompatible with Sustainable Production Study Bioenergy holds a promise on being one of the top […] January , February ,  Modern Bio-Energy Critical Meeting Global Climate Change Goals January , February ,  Debra QuickLeave a Comment on Modern Bio-Energy Critical Meeting Global Climate Change Goals Climate Change View All A Look Back at Global Warming in   is among  warmest years ever and the - […] January , February ,  Looking Back at the Extreme Weather Events of  January , February ,  Debra QuickLeave a Comment on Looking Back at the Extreme Weather Events of  Copyright © . All Rights Reserved. Home Renewable Climate Solar Energy Wind Energy BIO Energy About Subscribe Contact 
 Climate Home News About us Mission, vision and values The team Advisory board Supporters Anonymous sources policy Contact us Write for us Partner with us Make a complaint Menu Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Latest climate change news EU uses pollution tax funds to back Romanian gas pipeline  September  News The European Union is using taxes on pollution to fund a gas pipeline in Romania, claiming it will reduce emissions compared to coal Comment Leaders must listen to the people and end fossil fuels  September  Comment Masses of people will take to the streets in  events around the world this weekend, to call for a phaseout of coal, oil and gas News Overshoot Commission calls for research into solar geoengineering  September  News Dimming the sun could “complement” emissions cuts, says panel of leaders, while acknowledging concerns about the risks Comment Debt relief must break dependence on fossil fuel exports  September  Comment There is a vicious cycle between fossil fuel reliance and debt, which helps explain why so many oil exporters are heavily indebted Analysis Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations  September  Analysis The country is not moving away from coal yet, doesn’t want to hand rich nations a win and thinks the JETP terms aren’t good enough News Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing  September  News Small island states have asked the world’s maritime tribunal to clarify state obligations on climate change, which could be influential for other courts. Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’  September  Comment We need to recognise the diversity of ways climate impacts influence people’s movements, not reduce them to one label G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels  September  News The world’s largest economies agreed to push for a tripling of renewable energy capacity by , but made no progress on oil and gas phaseout Latest news Become a CHN sponsor Become a CHN sponsor Sponsored content How can we create the net zero buildings of tomorrow?  September  SME Climate Hub drives accountability with new reporting tool  July  Sustainable fishing offers lifeline to communities hit by climate crisis  July  Australia can leverage efficiency and electrification to power a net-zero future  July  Disaster risk reduction needs to sit at the heart of climate adaptation  June  Most popular G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’ A wolf in sheep’s clothing: why Africa should shun carbon markets Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations Mexico’s ruling party picks climate scientist for presidential run Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing UAE pitches itself as Africa’s carbon credits leader Climate Home News seeks pitches on renewable energy supply chain Population boom driving Philippines’ climate vulnerability Southeast Asia must not let Japan hijack its energy transition Tweets by @ClimateHome Comment Identifying loss and damage is tough – we need a pragmatic but science-based approach  July  It’s often hard to judge whether a drought is weather-related or climate related and whether people are displaced by the drought or conflicts Morocco’s centuries-old irrigation system under threat from climate change  June  As Morocco faces increasingly extreme temperatures, indigenous communities in the country’s southeast suffer the brunt of the climate crisis Senegal shows African countries are not passive beneficiaries of climate finance  June  While drawing up their renewables deal with wealthy countries, Senegalese government, civil society, business and researchers had their say Multilateral banks’ investments in industrial livestock undermine their Paris climate commitments  June  Public money should stop flowing towards the expansion of animal agriculture, which is responsible for a fifth of the world’s emissions Republicans’ anti-ESG attack may be silencing insurers, but it isn’t changing their pro-climate business decisions  June  Republicans are pressuring insurers out of climate coalitions but won’t change their pro-climate business decisions How a local victory against petrochemicals can spur global action on plastics  June  The Banner sisters fought for the preservation of land in America’s ‘Cancer Alley’. They are now in Paris to demand a global cap on plastic production. G leaders must fulfil their promise to stop funding fossil fuels  May  Rich nations’ leaders need to uphold their commitment to a clean and sustainable energy future. What’s at stake for climate at the World Bank’s spring meeting?  April  The World Bank controls tens of billions of dollars which can make a real difference in the fight against climate change. A coalition of nations is pushing for green reforms. Comment Section × The climate crisis - and how we confront it - is THE story of our lifetimes. At Climate Home News, we believe journalism can make a difference. Our mission is to produce original reporting that informs, engages and inspires action. This takes time and expertise. Support our work today with a donation or by subscribing to our daily newsletter for exclusive extra content. Subscribe About us Contact us ©  Climate Home News Ltd. All rights reserved. Privacy policyclick here Want our celebrated digest of weekly news straight to your inbox? Sign up to Climate Weekly, plus you'll get breaking news, investigations and bulletins from key events. Newsletter Signup Subscribe or I'm signed up Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store andor access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent 
 Climate : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expandcollapse submenu for News National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expandcollapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expandcollapse submenu for Music Hip-Hop  Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expandcollapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured Rough Translation Louder Than A Riot It's Been a Minute Life Kit More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop Hip-Hop  Tiny Desk All Songs Considered Music Features Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Organization NPR Network Support Careers Connect Press Ethics Climate NPR's full coverage of climate change and related issues. Climate Subscribe to NPR's Up First Email Search and rescue operations are underway in the region affected by floods due to Storm Daniel in Derna, Libya, Sept. . Hamza Al AhmarAnadolu Agency via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Hamza Al AhmarAnadolu Agency via Getty Images World Survivors of Libya's deadly floods describe catastrophic scenes and tragic losses September ,  • "They have seen death, not just in their families but within themselves as well," a Libyan doctor tells NPR. "Their souls are crushed, their hope is lost. How can you come back from such a thing?" Rich Snyder, who retired as the fire marshal of Sierra Madre, Calif., now works for Allied Disaster Defense, a California company that hardens homes against wildfire. One strategy is covering air vents with ember-blocking mesh. Liz BakerNPR hide caption toggle caption Liz BakerNPR Business Preparing homes for wildfires is big business that's only getting started September ,  • Climate change, technological leaps, panicked insurers, the shifting sense of responsibility: All are powering the still-nascent, but fast-growing industry of preparing homes for wildfires. Preparing homes for wildfires is big business that's only getting started Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> A couple walks in a flooded Saint Mark's Square during high waters on Nov. , , in Venice, Italy. Marco SecchiGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Marco SecchiGetty Images Venice won't be listed as one of the world's most endangered sites September ,  • UNESCO, the United Nations body that designates and protects World Heritage sites, says it will continue to monitor the famed Italian city's issues, including climate change and over-tourism. Internal Exxon documents obtained by The Wall Street Journal span Rex Tillerson's tenure as the company's chief executive from  until . Brian HarkinGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Brian HarkinGetty Images Exxon minimized climate change internally after conceding that fossil fuels cause it September ,  • The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that as recently as , Exxon executives were privately pushing back on the idea that humans need to cut their use of oil and gas to limit global warming. A volunteer takes a break on the rubble of a building in a flash flood-damaged area in Derna on September , . The Libyan Red Crescent said Thursday that more than , were killed in the flood and another , were still missing. Abdullah DomaAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Abdullah DomaAFP via Getty Images Africa Death toll soars to , from flooding in Libyan coastal city of Derna September ,  • Another , are reported missing from flooding caused by Mediterranean storm Daniel, the Libyan Red Crescent says. The city of Derna, Libya on Wednesday, Sept. , . Floods from extreme rain killed thousands of people and washed entire neighborhoods into the sea. Muhammad J. ElalwanyAP hide caption toggle caption Muhammad J. ElalwanyAP Climate change exacerbates deadly floods worldwide September ,  • Climate change makes deadly floods, like what happened in Libya, more likely. Floods in China, Greece and Brazil in recent weeks underscore the growing danger. Threatened by rising sea levels, San Francisco is considering drastic measures to save its historic shoreline. Above, the Ferry Building pictured in . Anthony JacobsAP Images for T-Mobile hide caption toggle caption Anthony JacobsAP Images for T-Mobile San Francisco considers lifting the Ferry Building by  feet to save it from the sea September ,  • The Ferry Building has been a beacon to incoming ferry riders since the late s. Threatened by rising sea levels, the waterfront city is considering drastic measures to save its historic shoreline. San Francisco considers lifting the Ferry Building by  feet to save it from the sea Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript A combination image of satellite photos shows an area before and after a powerful storm and floods hit the country, in Derna, Libya, on Sept.  (top) and Sept. . EyePress NewsEYEPRESS via Reuters Connect hide caption toggle caption EyePress NewsEYEPRESS via Reuters Connect World More than , have been found dead after Libya floods September ,  • In the coastal city of Derna, dams broke, sending a torrent of water that submerged whole neighborhoods. Rescue efforts are complicated by the fact that Libya is divided between rival governments. The flooded St. Mark's Square on Nov. , , in Venice, two days after the city suffered a high tide. Filippo MonteforteAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Filippo MonteforteAFP via Getty Images Venice may be put on the endangered list, thanks to human-created climate change September ,  • The impacts of climate change including related disasters, such as wildfires and sea level rise, are increasingly raising a question about how best to save cultural heritage. Venice may be put on the endangered list, thanks to human-created climate change Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript People check an area damaged by flash floods in Derna, eastern Libya, on Monday. AFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption AFP via Getty Images Middle East Libya fears a spiraling death toll from powerful storm floods September ,  • At least hundreds of people have died and thousands are feared missing in eastern Libya after Storm Daniel swept in, destroying dams and unleashing a torrent of muddy water that carried homes away. Libya fears a spiraling death toll from powerful storm floods Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Hurricane Lee is expected to restrengthen in the coming days, the National Hurricane Center said Sunday. National Oceanic and Atmospheric AssociationScreenshot by NPR hide caption toggle caption National Oceanic and Atmospheric AssociationScreenshot by NPR Weather Hurricane Lee is forecast to push dangerous surf along the East Coast September ,  • The powerful Category  storm is restrengthening as it moves northwest, but currently poses no immediate threat to people on land, according to the National Hurricane Center. Clouds surround downtown Phoenix at sunset on July , . Matt YorkAP hide caption toggle caption Matt YorkAP End may be in sight for Phoenix's historic heat wave of -degree-plus weather September ,  • On Sunday, it was the th day this year that the official reading at Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport hit  degrees. But the end may finally be in sight for residents of Arizona's largest city. Emissions from burning fossil fuels aren't falling fast enough to stop dangerous levels of warming, a U.N. report warns. Christopher FurlongGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Christopher FurlongGetty Images The world is still falling short on limiting climate change, according to U.N. report September ,  • The outlook for climate change is better now than a few years ago, but countries have a long way to go to avoid dangerous climate impacts, according to a new report. According to he U.S. Fish and Wildlife service, about % of the species that have gotten protection from the landmark law – like the Key Deer — have avoided extinction. Ryan KellmanNPR hide caption toggle caption Ryan KellmanNPR Consider This from NPR Climate Change is Making It Difficult to Protect Endangered Species September ,  • The Endangered Species Act turns  this year. Climate Change is Making It Difficult to Protect Endangered Species Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Millions of Americans receive little or no information about flood risk before they buy a house or sign a lease, leading families to put their safety, belongings and financial security in harm's way. New rules in four states aim to address the problem. Ryan KellmanNPR hide caption toggle caption Ryan KellmanNPR Residents of four states will get more information about flood risk to their homes September ,  • Four states are strengthening rules that require home sellers and landlords to disclose information about whether a home has flooded in the past, or is likely to flood in the future. Residents of four states will get more information about flood risk to their homes Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Kaitlin Brito for NPR Education Extreme heat is cutting into recess for kids. Experts say that's a problem September ,  • A heat wave at the start of the school year has educators scrambling to keep kids cool and safe. Extreme heat is cutting into recess for kids. Experts say that's a problem Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Attendees look at a double rainbow over flooding on a desert plain on Sept. , after heavy rains turned the annual Burning Man festival site in Nevada's Black Rock Desert into a mud pit. Julie JammotAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Julie JammotAFP via Getty Images Climate activists protested at Burning Man. Then the climate itself crashed the party September ,  • Burners were forced to endure hours of torrential rains before tens of thousands bailed on the festival. Scientists warn that such large bursts of showers are a result of a warming planet. Commuters make their way down a smoggy road in Lahore, Pakistan in . Extreme heat waves make air pollution, like smog, worse. Arif AliAFP via Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Arif AliAFP via Getty Images Extreme heat makes air quality worse–that's bad for health September ,  • Air quality around the world suffered in  because of climate-induced extreme heat, according to a new report from the World Meteorological Association. An oil pumpjack at work in the Permian Basin of West Texas. Joe RaedleGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Joe RaedleGetty Images Consider This from NPR When Big Oil Gets In The Carbon Removal Game, Who Wins? September ,  • Giant machines sucking carbon dioxide out of the air to fight climate change sounds like science fiction, but it's close to becoming a reality, with billions of dollars of support from the U.S. government. When Big Oil Gets In The Carbon Removal Game, Who Wins? Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript In this undated file photo provided by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, caribou from the Porcupine caribou herd migrate onto the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in northeast Alaska. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service via AP hide caption toggle caption U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service via AP Environment Biden ends drilling in ANWR, sparking criticism, as Willow Project moves forward September ,  • The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is home to dozens of species — and to an ongoing political fight over oil and gas. Now, the Biden administration is hoping ending oil and gas leases will be a win. The Great Salt Lake this winter, before spring runoff increased its elevation Kirk SieglerNPR hide caption toggle caption Kirk SieglerNPR Environment Green groups sue, say farmers are drying up Great Salt Lake September ,  • Environmental groups have filed suit against the state of Utah arguing leaders aren't doing enough to prevent the state's namesake Great Salt Lake from drying up. Green groups sue, say farmers are drying up Great Salt Lake Listen · : : Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https:www.npr.orgplayerembed" width="%" height="" frameborder="" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Police officers check a house as residents wade through a flooded street after floods caused by a cyclone in Passo Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul state, Brazil, Monday. Diogo ZanattaFutura PressAP hide caption toggle caption Diogo ZanattaFutura PressAP Latin America A cyclone has killed over  people in Brazil, with more flooding expected September ,  • The southern Brazilian states of Rio Grande do Sul and neighboring Santa Catarina are reeling after a devastating cyclone killed  people and displaced thousands. As oceans get hotter, scientists are looking for ways to safeguard coral species so they can be used to restore reefs in the future. Donald MiralleGetty Images hide caption toggle caption Donald MiralleGetty Images One way to save coral reefs? Deep freeze them for the future September ,  • As oceans get hotter, coral reefs are suffering. Scientists are working on ways to preserve coral by freezing and then reviving them to restore reefs someday. A man cools off at a temporary misting station deployed by the city in the Downtown Eastside due to a heat wave, in Vancouver, British Columbia, Aug. , . DARRYL DYCKAP hide caption toggle caption DARRYL DYCKAP This summer was the hottest on record across the Northern Hemisphere, the U.N. says September ,  • The world's oceans were the hottest ever recorded, while Antarctica continued to set records for low amounts of sea ice, the World Meteorological Organization said. More from Climate Load more stories Browse archive or search npr.org Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook  Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsor 
 News | World Meteorological Organization Skip to main content World Meteorological Organization Weather · Climate · Water Toggle navigation 简体中文EnglishFrançaisРусскийEspañol Go Our mandate What we do Weather How we do it Public-Private Engagement (PPE) ocp innovation webinar Space borne Precipitation Measurements and Application WMO and HMEI Information Day WMO Innovation Seminar - Microsoft and the UN Sustainable Development Goals Climate Focus areas Water Programmes Projects Resources Bulletin MeteoWorld Library Gender Equality Education and training Standards and Recommended Practices The WMO Building  Conference Centre Language resources World Meteorological Day United in Science Coronavirus (COVID-) Media Events About us Who we are Vision, Mission, Strategic Planning Members Governance The Secretariat Employment Awards Procurement Finance and Accountability Related links FAQs Contact us Community Platform Reform Search form Search Home Media News News Main News Press Release News from Members Multimedia Contact us FqIWWgAAKTB.jpeg Libya floods show need for multi-hazard early warnings, unified response News Early Warnings Disasters Publish Date:  September  The tragedy in Libya highlights the devastating and cascading consequences of extreme weather on fragile states and shows the need for a multi-hazard early warnings which embrace all levels of government and society, said WMO Secretary-General Prof. Petteri Taalas. thumbnail_Photo.jpeg Storm Daniel leads to extreme rain and floods in Mediterranean, heavy loss of life in Libya News Floods Disasters Early Warnings Publish Date:  September  Extreme rainfall from a storm system called Storm Daniel has hit parts of the Mediterranean, causing devastating flooding and loss of life in Libya, the worst affected country, as well as in Greece, Turkey and Bulgaria. thumbnails.jpg Window to reach climate goals ‘rapidly closing’ News Climate change Publish Date:  September  The world is not on track to meet the long-term goals set out in the Paris Agreement for limiting global temperature rise, according to a new report from the UN Framework for Climate Change (UNFCCC). Celeste_Saulo_SG_.png American Meteorological Society honors Celeste Saulo News WMO Meteorology Publish Date:  September  World Meteorological Organization Secretary-General-elect, Prof. Celeste Saulo, has been named an Honorary Member of the American Meteorological Society (AMS) – a prestigious award which recognizes outstanding individuals and organizations in the weather, water, and climate community. _e_k.jpeg Scientists assess the impacts of a warming ocean News Oceans Climate change Publish Date:  September  With global average sea surface temperatures at record highs, scientists associated with the WMO co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme have made a collective assessment of recent global trends and what may be expected in the future. This includes an observed basin-wide warming of the ocean and an increase in marine heatwaves. Show more Follow WMO Discover Events News Bookstore Projects Bulletin MeteoWorld Learn Visit the Library Youth Corner WMO Governance Partnerships Contact us Procurement Privacy policy Report fraud, corruption or abuse About us Disclaimer Copyright Sitemap ©  World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
 Climate Home News About us Mission, vision and values The team Advisory board Supporters Anonymous sources policy Contact us Write for us Partner with us Make a complaint Menu Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Home News Comment Sponsored Newsletters Latest climate change news EU uses pollution tax funds to back Romanian gas pipeline  September  News The European Union is using taxes on pollution to fund a gas pipeline in Romania, claiming it will reduce emissions compared to coal Comment Leaders must listen to the people and end fossil fuels  September  Comment Masses of people will take to the streets in  events around the world this weekend, to call for a phaseout of coal, oil and gas News Overshoot Commission calls for research into solar geoengineering  September  News Dimming the sun could “complement” emissions cuts, says panel of leaders, while acknowledging concerns about the risks Comment Debt relief must break dependence on fossil fuel exports  September  Comment There is a vicious cycle between fossil fuel reliance and debt, which helps explain why so many oil exporters are heavily indebted Analysis Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations  September  Analysis The country is not moving away from coal yet, doesn’t want to hand rich nations a win and thinks the JETP terms aren’t good enough News Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing  September  News Small island states have asked the world’s maritime tribunal to clarify state obligations on climate change, which could be influential for other courts. Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’  September  Comment We need to recognise the diversity of ways climate impacts influence people’s movements, not reduce them to one label G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels  September  News The world’s largest economies agreed to push for a tripling of renewable energy capacity by , but made no progress on oil and gas phaseout Latest news Become a CHN sponsor Become a CHN sponsor Sponsored content How can we create the net zero buildings of tomorrow?  September  SME Climate Hub drives accountability with new reporting tool  July  Sustainable fishing offers lifeline to communities hit by climate crisis  July  Australia can leverage efficiency and electrification to power a net-zero future  July  Disaster risk reduction needs to sit at the heart of climate adaptation  June  Most popular G leaders strike renewables deal, stall on fossil fuels Stop calling people ‘climate refugees’ A wolf in sheep’s clothing: why Africa should shun carbon markets Why India is rebuffing a coal-to-clean deal with rich nations Mexico’s ruling party picks climate scientist for presidential run Small islands slam ‘endless’ climate talks at landmark maritime court hearing UAE pitches itself as Africa’s carbon credits leader Climate Home News seeks pitches on renewable energy supply chain Population boom driving Philippines’ climate vulnerability Southeast Asia must not let Japan hijack its energy transition Tweets by @ClimateHome Comment Identifying loss and damage is tough – we need a pragmatic but science-based approach  July  It’s often hard to judge whether a drought is weather-related or climate related and whether people are displaced by the drought or conflicts Morocco’s centuries-old irrigation system under threat from climate change  June  As Morocco faces increasingly extreme temperatures, indigenous communities in the country’s southeast suffer the brunt of the climate crisis Senegal shows African countries are not passive beneficiaries of climate finance  June  While drawing up their renewables deal with wealthy countries, Senegalese government, civil society, business and researchers had their say Multilateral banks’ investments in industrial livestock undermine their Paris climate commitments  June  Public money should stop flowing towards the expansion of animal agriculture, which is responsible for a fifth of the world’s emissions Republicans’ anti-ESG attack may be silencing insurers, but it isn’t changing their pro-climate business decisions  June  Republicans are pressuring insurers out of climate coalitions but won’t change their pro-climate business decisions How a local victory against petrochemicals can spur global action on plastics  June  The Banner sisters fought for the preservation of land in America’s ‘Cancer Alley’. They are now in Paris to demand a global cap on plastic production. G leaders must fulfil their promise to stop funding fossil fuels  May  Rich nations’ leaders need to uphold their commitment to a clean and sustainable energy future. What’s at stake for climate at the World Bank’s spring meeting?  April  The World Bank controls tens of billions of dollars which can make a real difference in the fight against climate change. A coalition of nations is pushing for green reforms. Comment Section × The climate crisis - and how we confront it - is THE story of our lifetimes. At Climate Home News, we believe journalism can make a difference. Our mission is to produce original reporting that informs, engages and inspires action. This takes time and expertise. Support our work today with a donation or by subscribing to our daily newsletter for exclusive extra content. Subscribe About us Contact us ©  Climate Home News Ltd. All rights reserved. Privacy policyclick here Want our celebrated digest of weekly news straight to your inbox? Sign up to Climate Weekly, plus you'll get breaking news, investigations and bulletins from key events. Newsletter Signup Subscribe or I'm signed up Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store andor access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent 
 Climate Group Skip to main content Search About us Areas of Focus Back Key areas Energy Transport Built environment Industry Food Major programmes Climate Week NYC Showcasing amazing climate action ConcreteZero Creating a market for net zero concrete EP A growing group of energy-smart companies committed to improving their energy efficiency. EV Making light-duty electric transport the new normal by  RE The world’s most influential companies, committed to % renewable power EV+ Unlocking a revolution in zero-emission trucking and other heavy-duty vehicles RouteZero Speeding up the shift to zero emission vehicles for COP SteelZero Building demand for net zero steel Under Coalition Driving climate action in states and regions News Events Join us Under Coalition Support us Support us Driving climate action. fast Our mission is to drive climate action. Fast. Our goal is a world of net zero carbon emissions by , with greater prosperity for all. We focus on systems with the highest emissions and where our networks - both governments and businesses - have the greatest opportunity to drive change. We do this by building large and influential networks and holding organisations accountable, turning their commitments into action. We share what we achieve together to show more organisations what they could do. Our work Our mission and goals Our news Our latest stories Our latest stories See more stories Press release th September JSW Steel, IKEA and Flipkart to pilot electric trucks as part of Climate Group’s EV+ initiative Press release th August Major Indian, global businesses urge G leaders to support a .-degree aligned just, clean energy transition News nd August Challenges EP members are facing and our work to tackle them Get in touch If you've got a question about one of our initiatives, becoming a member or anything else, our teams are here to help, so please get in touch. Get in touch Support us Board of Trustees Contact Our team Careers Media contacts Newsletter Membership Hub LinkedIn  Facebook  ©  Climate Group. Company Registration: . Charity Reg: . The Climate Group, Inc is also a US-based (c) with EIN -. Modern Slavery Statement Privacy Policy Terms of Service 
 The Climate Reality Project Skip to main content JOIN OUR WEST AFRICA CLIMATE REALITY LEADERSHIP TRAINING APPLY TODAY >> Main Menu Close Sign Up About Us Take Action Our Work JOIN A TRAINING Donate search JOIN A TRAINING Donate At The Climate Reality Project, our global network of . million is working to build a just and sustainable true net-zero future. Join us. Get the tools, training, and network to help stop global warming and build a net-zero future for the Earth. Your Email Address I'm In! Hidden link for modal How We Get to True Net-Zero We train and mobilize people worldwide with four global campaigns to accelerate climate action this decade and help us reach true net-zero by  – the point where global warming can stop in as little as three-to-five years and the Earth begins to heal. Reducing Emissions Working to build a clean energy future by cutting emissions and opposing new fossil fuel infrastructure. LEARN MORE → Calling out Greenwashing Exposing the lies fossil fuel companies tell and countering with the truth about the energy transition we need. LEARN MORE → Financing a Just Transition Mobilizing global finance to build thriving clean energy economies. LEARN MORE → Strengthening International Cooperation on Climate Fighting to keep the Paris Agreement strong, hold governments to their commitments, and reform the COP process. LEARN MORE → Train with Al Gore Join the Climate Reality Leadership Corps by attending a multi-day training with former US Vice President Al Gore and leading scientists and experts and get the tools, know-how, and network to make a difference on climate. LEARN MORE → Take Action Now Join our Training in West Africa→ Urge new World Bank President Ajay Banga to take climate action→ Learn More About The Climate Crisis→ Take the Electrification Pledge→ Climate Reality in Action July ,  When We Are Taking Care of Our Environment, We Are Actually Taking Care of Ourselves July ,  Climate Reality New York Coalition Helps Pass Landmark Building Electrification Legislation July ,  Fighting Fossil Fuels – and Winning – in the Susquehanna Valley July ,  Climate Reality Central Minnesota Chapter Helps Pass Green Bank Legislation  th Street NW Suite  Washington, DC  Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Make an Impact Join a Training Join a Chapter Get Updates Our Climate Blog Articles Stories Videos About Us Our Mission Climate and Environmental Justice Climate Justice For All Project Grants Chapters Branches Strategic Partnerships Who We Are Work With Us Donate Press Reality Hub OUR INITIATIVES Climate Reality Leadership Corps % Committed Our Climate Moment  Hours of Reality Public Webinars Campus Corps 
 Climate | Initiatives | WWF Skip to Main Content WWF Toggle Nav Donate Adopt World Wildlife Fund Toggle Nav Search Submit Search Donate Toggle Donate button Make a Donation Donate in Someone's Name Renew your Membership Join as a Partner in Conservation Respond to our TV Ad See Other Ways to Support Adopt Toggle Adopt button Adoptions Apparel More Gifts Toggle Our Work Dropdown Links Learn more about our impact What we care about People Places Species Climate crisis Sustainability How we work Public policy Science Business Wildlife conservation About WWF WWF works to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and wildlife, collaborating with partners from local to global levels in nearly  countries. Learn more about our impact Toggle Get involved Dropdown Links See all ways to get involved Take action Fundraise Give Send ecards Get email Educational resources Leave a legacy gift Travel with us Connect with us Facebook   YouTube See all ways to get involved Toggle About us Dropdown Links Contact Mission and values Who we are History Leadership Experts Stories and updates World Wildlife Magazine Newsroom Financials Careers Contact Search Search Submit Search Donate Toggle Donate button Make a Donation Donate in Someone's Name Renew your Membership Join as a Partner in Conservation Respond to our TV Ad See Other Ways to Support Adopt Toggle Adopt button Adoptions Apparel More Gifts Our Work Our Work Climate Top Overview Why It Matters What WWF is Doing How You Can Help Donate Climate Create a climate-resilient and zero-carbon world, powered by renewable energy Overview People around the world are calling on leaders to take action on climate change. Our world is changing faster than anyone predicted. Already, freshwater supplies are shrinking, agricultural yields are dropping, our forests are burning, and rising oceans are more acidic—all, in part, due to a warming climate. As our natural world changes around us, so does our way of life. Coastal home values drop as insurance premiums rise; drought reduces feed for American farmers’ cattle and water for their crops; more pollen and dust in the air aggravates asthma and allergies in kids and adults alike. At WWF, we believe we can fight this consequential threat and build a safer, healthier and more resilient future for people and nature. We must rethink the way we produce and consume energy, food, and water; protect the world’s forests; and help people prepare for a changing world. Achieving this future will require action by everyone, and we are already well on our way. People are using their collective voices to demand change. Businesses are making investments in clean energy, already creating local jobs and stronger economies. Communities are redesigning their roads, buildings, airports, and railroads to make them climate resilient. And nations around the world are committed to delivering on a landmark global plan to curb climate change, known as the Paris Agreement. For decades, WWF has engaged with millions of Americans, leading businesses, and government leaders to prepare for inevitable change and reduce the emissions that drive climate change. Tweet Browse Photos & Videos h A climate high, a climate low, and our climate future In these strange days of summer, we witnessed an extreme climate high and an extreme climate low. Both have significant implications for the planet’s health and for confronting the climate crisis moving forward. Continue Reading h More Stories h Why It Matters Wildlife Climate change is already having a significant impact on wild animals around the globe. Changes in climate are altering the timing of life cycles, causing species to shift where they live, and in some cases even leading to extinction. We can help species adapt to our changing world by ensuring that our own responses to climate change factor in the health and wellbeing of the habitat and resources on which they depend. Front Line Communities Climate change imposes heavy burdens on those living nearest to floodplains, shorelines, and polluted city centers. By demanding cuts to dangerous pollution, providing access to green jobs, and spurring economic growth for all Americans, we can begin a fair transition to the economy of the future—one powered by clean and renewable energy. WWF recognizes and supports cities’ transitions toward % renewable energy. WWF also works with communities worldwide on environmentally responsible disaster recovery, reconstruction, and risk reduction. Our Security In the US and around the world, climate change is destabilizing food production, displacing people in vulnerable countries, and threatening our shorelines with sea level rise and more extreme storms. The Paris Agreement is the world’s collective response to addressing climate change in the years to come. Although the US government has signaled its intention to withdraw from this global pact, America’s cities, states, and businesses are working with world leaders to turn the promise of that agreement into concrete action. Our collective security, health, and prosperity rest on urgent and collaborative action. Our Economy American taxpayers are paying the price for weather disasters, crop failures, and higher insurance rates associated with our warming world. The good news is that America’s leading businesses, along with our city and state leaders, are taking the lead on climate action. They are investing in clean renewable energy and locking in cheaper energy prices—and creating jobs, strong communities, and a more stable climate in the process. Our Fresh Water Climate change is altering patterns of weather and water around the world, causing shortages and droughts in some areas and floods in others. These changes will combine to make less water available for agriculture, energy generation, cities and ecosystems around the world. There’s a lot we can do to create a water-secure future, and it starts by learning how much water it takes to make the things in your daily life—from the coffee you drink to the t-shirts you wear. Once you know the water footprint of everyday items, choose wisely and purchase products that have a minimal impact on the places where they come from. Our Oceans Both people and wildlife depend on the health of our oceans as a source of sustenance and livelihood. Our oceans absorb most of the warming and carbon pollution occurring today, even more than the atmosphere. Warmer oceans are driving stronger storms and bleaching coral reefs. As oceans absorb carbon dioxide, they become more acidic, threatening most shelled organisms, including small crustaceans fundamental to the marine food chain. Our Arctic The Artic is warming twice as fast as the rest of the earth, affecting weather around the globe and threatening the foundation of Arctic ecosystems. Arctic summer sea ice is expected to disappear before mid-century, which will have cascading consequences worldwide. We can help conserve this region by protecting the Artic from offshore development, reducing pollution and accidents, and enhancing ecosystem resilience to climate change. What WWF Is Doing To adequately address the climate crisis we must urgently reduce carbon pollution and prepare for the consequences of global warming—which the world is already experiencing—and raise our collective voice for action. Combining global outreach with local expertise, WWF’s focus is on: Building a Low Carbon USA WWF believes that strong action on climate change that grows our economy and strengthens our energy security begins with setting ambitious goals. That is why WWF is working with businesses, cities, and national governments to set emissions reduction goals aligned what science says is needed. And because that strong low carbon economy needs to be powered by clean and cheap renewable energy, WWF is leading businesses and cities to make it very easy to buy. With innovative strategies and partnerships WWF is building momentum for a low-carbon economy by: Helping companies to set and meet science-based targets Urging America’s largest companies use their collective purchasing power to scale up renewable energy and bringing those lessons to help cities do the same. Challenging all US cities to set ambitious goals, transition toward % renewable energy, and address local climate threats Preparing for a Changing World WWF works with local communities, governments, and others around the world to help people and nature prepare for the many impacts of a changing climate. To do this we: Work with communities and governments to understand and prepare for climate change Integrate environmental considerations into disaster recovery, reconstruction, and risk reduction Study how people’s responses to climate change affect ecosystems and wildlife Assess species to determine traits that make them resilient or vulnerable to changes in climate Delivering on the Promise of the Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement is the world’s collective response to addressing climate change in the years to come. Alongside the federal government, America’s cities, states, and businesses are working with world leaders to turn the promise of that agreement into concrete action. WWF is helping accelerate climate action from national governments, and from cities, states, and businesses to deliver on the ambitious temperature goals of the historic Paris Agreement by: Providing financial support to developing countries as an implementing partner of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Building a coalition of non-federal actors in the US who remained committed to the Paris Agreement Helping transition developing countries to clean energy sources like wind and solar Working with companies and cities to transform their businesses to dramatically reduce their emissions throughout their entire value chain Ensuring that ecosystem-based approaches to adaptation are incorporated into national development plans Collaborating with US Latino leaders and communities to raise awareness of climate risks from Latin America to North America Curbing climate pollution from international aviation Reducing Emissions from Deforestation Forests are nature’s greatest technology for combating climate change: they naturally absorb carbon dioxide (CO), reducing the amount of this heat-trapping gas in our atmosphere. When forests are not managed responsibly, they release large quantities of C into the atmosphere. Deforestation and degradation are the largest sources of C emissions after the burning of fossil fuels. Scientists estimate up to % of global carbon emissions come from deforestation. WWF saves forests and fights climate change by: Supporting REDD+, which offers financial incentives to developing countries that create and implement strategies to manage and use their forests responsibly. Creating multi-million dollar funds to properly manage forests that are designated as protected. Working to end illegal logging. Ensuring that global climate change agreements reduce forest loss and degradation. Helping countries and regions assess the benefits nature provides under different development and climate change scenarios. View All Press Releases WWF Statement on the Global Stocktake Technical Dialogue Synthesis Report September ,  WWF Statement on the One-Year Anniversary of the Inflation Reduction Act August ,  WWF Statement on Senate Ratification of Kigali Amendment September ,  Projects The Renewable Thermal Collaborative The Renewable Thermal Collaborative (RTC) is the global coalition for companies, institutions, and governments committed to scaling up renewable heating and cooling at their facilities, dramatically cutting carbon emissions. Biogenic Carbon Footprint Calculator for Harvested Wood Products WWF, in partnership with Quantis, Intl., has developed a free, user-friendly calculator to calculate biogenic emissions for a variety of forest-based products. The calculator's aim is to support companies in the dynamic accounting of biogenic emissions of wood-based products, improving the quality of their greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories and facilitating decision-making around the sustainable sourcing, design, and use of those products. This calculator is a beta test and, if useful and aligned with forthcoming Greenhouse Gas Protocol guidance, will be updated and improved. View More Projects Publications Climate futures across generations and species WWF Calls for Prioritizing Climate Finance in FY Budget Agreement Climate Crowd on the Ground The Potential for Seaweed as Livestock Feed, Workshop Report  View More Publications Experts Nikhil Advani Director, Climate, Communities and Wildlife Shaun Martin Vice President and Deputy, Climate Change Ryan Bartlett Director, Climate Risk Management & Resilience Anita van Breda Senior Director, Environment and Disaster Management Marty Spitzer Senior Director, Climate and Renewable Energy Christa Anderson Director of Climate Science and Carbon Metrics, Climate Change Rebecca Shaw Chief Scientist and Senior Vice President, Global Science David Kuhn Lead, Corporate Resilience Tim Juliani Director, US Corporate Climate Engagement Daniel Riley Director, International Corporate Climate Partnerships Brent Loken Global Food Lead Scientist, Global Science Cihang Yuan Senior Program Officer, International Corporate Climate Partnerships John Holler Climate Cooperation & Sustainable Fuels, Climate Cheryl Margoluis Executive Director, CARE-WWF Alliance Lucas Black Vice President, Climate Finance Marcene Mitchell Senior Vice President, Climate Change How You Can Help Take Action Join us to make change. Speak up for species and places through WWF's Action Center. Give to WWF Make a gift to WWF's global conservation efforts and choose from symbolic adoptions, apparel, and more! Log in Discover Who we are Financials Latest stories Our work Newsroom En español Travel Support Donate now Adopt an animal Give in someone's name Gift and estate planning Connect Take action Get involved Careers Contact Help center WWF country offices Ethics reporting WWF World Wildlife Fund  th Street, N.W. Washington, DC  Connect with us Facebook   YouTube RSS Feeds World Wildlife Fund Inc. is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization (tax ID number -) under Section (c)() of the Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law. Site Terms Privacy PolicyYour Privacy Rights State Disclosures ©  World Wildlife Fund. WWF® and © Panda Symbol are owned by WWF. All rights reserved. 
 AirNow.gov Skip to main content X No Data Available There are no current and forecast air quality data found near your location. Please visit the for a list of cities with data. Please search for a U.S. location, or visit the International navigation tab. X Data Courtesy Of Unable to retrieve Data Providers. Search Search Bar No Location Selected AirNow About AirNow How to use this site AirNow Partners List of Partners For Partners FAQs Contact Us Announcements About the data AQI & Health Air Quality Index (AQI) AQI Basics Ozone Using the Air Quality Index Particle Pollution AQI Calculators Action Days Air Quality and Health Activity Guides Your Health Asthma and Heart Disease Health Professionals Air Quality Awareness Week Fires Wildfires Fire and Smoke Map Using AirNow During Wildfires Smoke Advisories Fires and Health Maps & Data Interactive Map National Maps Fire and Smoke Map Using AirNow During Wildfires Information by state Past Data By City By Monitor U.S. Embassies & Consulates AirData AirCompare DevelopersAPI AirNow Mobile App Education Air Quality Flag Program Air Quality Flag Program (En Español) What You Can Do Information for: Teachers Students Health Professionals International U.S. Embassies and Consulates Canada Mexico Resources EnviroFlash emails Air Sensors Web Cams DevelopersAPI Custom AirNow Maps Widgets Publications Publications (en español) Air Quality Videos Site Map Recursos en español Show Alerts Popup  Arrow pointing from Alerts Popup to the Tool button ⨯ System Alerts https:www.airnow.govalert Wildfire Smoke in Multiple States -- Wildfire smoke continues to impact air quality throughout the US. Please use the Fire and Smoke map to check on wildfire smoke impacts in your area. View All () Show Announcements Popup  Arrow pointing from Announcements Popup to the Tool button ⨯ Announcements https:www.airnow.govannouncement PM . Monitors in Lāhainā Maui -- EPA is monitoring the air for fine particles in Lāhainā. See the monitoring results on the AirNow Fire and Smoke Map by clicking the magnifying glass at the upper right and typing Lahaina, HI in the search box. Using the AirNow app? Tap the smoke icon to take you to the Fire and Smoke Map. View All () AQI Current Air Quality Forecast AQI Today Tomorrow More AirNow.gov Location Search Use this box for geographic or location based searches. Popup Current Air Quality Forecast AQI Today Tomorrow More AirNow.gov Location Search Get air quality data where you live. Fire & Smoke Map Monitors Near Me Recent Trends and PARTNERS Location Search Location Search Get air quality data where you live. Fire & Smoke Map Monitors Near Me Recent Trends AQI Legend Air Quality Index Scale  -  Good  -  Moderate  -  Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups (USG)  -  Unhealthy  -  Very Unhealthy  + Hazardous Current Air Quality Loading <div class="tippy-close-holder"> <div onmousedown="document.activeElement.style.visibility='hidden';"> <div class="fa fa-times" id="close-box" style="position: absolute; left: px; top: px; z-index: -;">&nbsp;<div> <div> <div> <div id="Map Info Icon Content from Home Current AQ Band" style="padding-top: px;"> <p>This map shows current air quality (<a href="aqiaqi-basicsusing-air-quality-index#nowcast" target="_blank">NowCast AQI<a>) for ozone or PM, whichever is highest. The area is approximate.<p> <p>Due to processing time, this map may take longer to update than the dial.<p> <div> National Maps No Pollutant Available Air Quality Forecast No Pollutant Available No Pollutant Available Announcements https:www.airnow.govannouncement PM . Monitors in Lāhainā Maui -- EPA is monitoring the air for fine particles in Lāhainā. See the monitoring results on the AirNow Fire and Smoke Map by clicking the magnifying glass at the upper right and typing Lahaina, HI in the search box. Using the AirNow app? Tap the smoke icon to take you to the Fire and Smoke Map. Explore Fires Current Fire Conditions Embassies and Consulates Embassies and Consulates Archived Dates Archived Dates Air Quality Webcams Webcams Air Quality Flag Program Air Quality Flag Program Sign up for Email Notifications Email Notifications AirNow.gov - Home of the U.S. Air Quality Index Home | Site Map | Contact Us AirNow.gov - Home of the U.S. Air Quality Index Home | Site Map | Contact Us 
World's Air Pollution: Real-time Air Quality IndexPlease wait while loading the real-time Air Quality dataWorld's Air Pollution: Real-time Air Quality Index Air Quality ScaleGoodModerateUnhealthyfor sensitive groupsUnhealthyVeryUnhealthyHazardous The website is brought to you by the World Air Quality Index projectWAQI.info: World Air Quality Index The above map shows the real-time air quality for more than , stations in the world. advertisementShare: How polluted is the air today? Check out the real-time air pollution map, for more than  countries.Can not find your city on the map?-or- let us locate the nearest station advertisementair quality rankings by country advertisementLatest Sharing:About the World Air Quality Index projectHow to use this web applicationTo get more information about a specific city, move your move over any of the the flags in the above map, then click to get the full air pollution historical data.GoodUnhealthyfor sensitive groupsVeryUnhealthyModerateUnhealthyHazardousAir Quality Index (AQI) CalculationThe Air Quality Index is based on measurement of particulate matter (PM. and PM), Ozone (O), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO), Sulfur Dioxide (SO) and Carbon Monoxide (CO) emissions. Most of the stations on the map are monitoring both PM. and PM data, but there are few exceptions where only PM is available.All measurements are based on hourly readings: For instance, an AQI reported at AM means that the measurement was done from AM to AM.Further information and linksWant to protect yourself against the air pollution?Check our mask and air purifier page.Want to know more Air Pollution?Check our Frequently Asked Question (FAQ) page.Want to see the Air Pollution Forecast?Check our Forecast page.Want to know more about the project and team?Check the Contact page.Want to access the Air Quality data via programatic API?Check the API page.Want your own air quality monitoring station?The GAIA air quality monitoring stations are using high-tech laser particle sensors to measure in real-time PM. pollution, which is one of the most harmful air pollutants.Very easy to set up, they only require a WIFI access point and a USB power supply. Once connected, air pollution levels are reported instantaneously and in real-time on our mapsGet your own GAIA quality monitoring station now!Air Quality ScaleThe AQI scale used for indexing the real-time pollution in the above map is based on the latest US EPA standard, using the Instant Cast reporting formula.AQIAir Pollution LevelHealth ImplicationsCautionary Statement (for PM.) - GoodAir quality is considered satisfactory, and air pollution poses little or no riskNone -ModerateAir quality is acceptable; however, for some pollutants there may be a moderate health concern for a very small number of people who are unusually sensitive to air pollution.Active children and adults, and people with respiratory disease, such as asthma, should limit prolonged outdoor exertion.-Unhealthy for Sensitive GroupsMembers of sensitive groups may experience health effects. The general public is not likely to be affected.Active children and adults, and people with respiratory disease, such as asthma, should limit prolonged outdoor exertion.-UnhealthyEveryone may begin to experience health effects; members of sensitive groups may experience more serious health effectsActive children and adults, and people with respiratory disease, such as asthma, should avoid prolonged outdoor exertion; everyone else, especially children, should limit prolonged outdoor exertion-Very UnhealthyHealth warnings of emergency conditions. The entire population is more likely to be affected.Active children and adults, and people with respiratory disease, such as asthma, should avoid all outdoor exertion; everyone else, especially children, should limit outdoor exertion.+HazardousHealth alert: everyone may experience more serious health effectsEveryone should avoid all outdoor exertionCreditsAll the credits must go to the worlwide EPA (Enviromental Protection Agencies), as all this work is only made possible thanks to their work. Check the full worldwide EPA list page.TranslationsEnglishAfrikaansAfrikaansአማርኛAmharicالعربيةArabicঅসমীয়াAssameseazərbaycanAzerbaijaniбеларускаяBelarusianбългарскиBulgarianবাংলাBanglabosanskiBosniancatalàCatalanČeštinaCzechCymraegWelshDanskDanishDeutschGermanΕλληνικάGreekesperantoEsperantoEspañolSpanisheestiEstonianeuskaraBasqueفارسیPersianSuomiFinnishFilipinoFilipinoFrançaisFrenchGaeilgeIrishgalegoGalicianગુજરાતીGujaratiHausaHausaעבריתHebrewहिन्दीHindiHrvatskiCroatianmagyarHungarianհայերենArmenianIndonesiaIndonesianíslenskaIcelandicItalianoItalian日本語JapaneseJawaJavaneseქართულიGeorgianқазақ тіліKazakhខ្មែរKhmerಕನ್ನಡKannada한국어KoreanкыргызчаKyrgyzLëtzebuergeschLuxembourgishລາວLaolietuviųLithuanianlatviešuLatvianMalagasyMalagasyмакедонскиMacedonianമലയാളംMalayalamмонголMongolianमराठीMarathiMelayuMalayMaltiMalteseမြန်မာBurmesenorskNorwegianनेपालीNepaliNederlandsDutchଓଡ଼ିଆOdiaਪੰਜਾਬੀPunjabipolskiPolishپښتوPashtoPortuguesePortugueseromânăRomanianРусскийRussianسنڌيSindhiසිංහලSinhalaSlovenčinaSlovakslovenščinaSlovenianSoomaaliSomalishqipAlbanianсрпскиSerbianSvenskaSwedishKiswahiliSwahiliதமிழ்TamilతెలుగుTeluguтоҷикӣTajikไทยThaiTürkçeTurkishУкраїнськаUkrainianاردوUrduo‘zbekUzbekTiếng ViệtVietnameseייִדישYiddish简体中文Chinese (Simplified)繁體中文Chinese (Traditional) advertisementUsage NoticeAll the Air Quality data are unvalidated at the time of publication, and due to quality assurance these data may be amended, without notice, at any time. The World Air Quality Index project has exercised all reasonable skill and care in compiling the contents of this information and under no circumstances will the World Air Quality Index project team or its agents be liable in contract, tort or otherwise for any loss, injury or damage arising directly or indirectly from the supply of this data.Map by leaflet. This product includes GeoLite data created by MaxMind, available from https:www.maxmind.com.This product includes geolocation from LocationIQ.com.Some of the icons made by Freepik from www.flaticon.com is licensed by CC . BY.WebApp Version .. 
 Clean air | Environmental Defense Fund Skip to main content Home Our work Our impact About us Get involved News and stories GO Donate Magnifying Glass Back Climate change solutions We deliver game-changing solutions that have a real impact for people around the globe. Our vision: A vital Earth. For everyone. Energy transition Cut methane emissions Get hydrogen right Make transportation cleaner People and nature Grow food sustainably Catch fish responsibly Improve water supplies Harness nature's power Reduce flood risk Healthy communities Make chemicals safer Reduce air pollution Close Featured We're driving climate action on the road to the UN climate talks, COP. Here's how. Bill Nye the Science Guy highlights the fastest way to slow global warming Back Our impact For more than  years, we have been building innovative solutions to the biggest environmental challenges — from soil to space.  impact report Vision , our strategic plan Close Featured Slashing methane to slow global warming right now Deep inside the Amazon, Indigenous leaders are fighting for our planet's future Back About us Guided by science and economics, and committed to climate justice, we work in the places, on the projects and with the people that can make the biggest difference. Our approach Advance rigorous science Apply economic principles Forge partnerships Ensure climate justice Advocate for smart policies Champion diversity Our people Our staff Leadership team Board of trustees Where we work China Europe India United States Close Featured Reimagining business for a sustainable future Our bold plan to stabilize the climate for a vital Earth Back Get involved If we act now — together — there’s still time to build a future where people, the economy and the Earth can all thrive. Every one of us has a role to play. Choose yours. Donate Donate monthly Renew your gift Make a tribute gift Plan a gift in your will Other ways to give Take action Help stop misinformation Close Featured  ways to fight climate change and be a better advocate Protect yourself from harmful chemicals in drinking water Back News and stories Stay informed and get inspired with our in-depth reporting about the people and ideas making a difference, insight from our experts and the latest progress in the climate flight. Headlines Expert commentary Stories and articles Video explainers Research and resources Published research Press releases Blogs Stay informed Close Featured Vital Signs, our digital magazine, will make you think and give you hope Want to use your job to save the planet? Degrees is for you. Clean air Helping a billion people breathe cleaner air The problem: Air pollution is a global public health crisis and the fourth leading cause of death globally. Nine out of  people around the world breathe unhealthy air, and burning fossil fuels is both the largest source of air pollution and the biggest cause of climate change. What we’re doing about it: We’re working to help  billion people breathe cleaner air in this decade. By pinpointing local pollution in countries around the world, we’re giving policymakers, community groups and the private sector the tools they need to reduce pollution and hold polluters accountable. The big picture Key PriorityHealthy communities Our work reducing air and climate pollution Article The unequal burden of air pollution Explainer How are our air and climate connected? Interactive tool Air tracker shows path pollution takes through neighborhoods Website Cleaning the air for everyone Video Air pollution varies dramatically — new tech helps us see it Video EDF launches “Reversing Childhood Asthma” education campaign Updates Read the latest articles, blogs and press releases on clean air. Meet the all-female team taking on India's air pollution challenges Article, August ,  Two scoops, hold the diesel Article, August ,  Back-to-school: Electric buses offer kids a cleaner, healthier ride Article, August ,  EPA to Undertake New Review of Smog Pollution Standards Press release, August ,  EDF Files Comments Calling for Strong EPA Limits on Climate Pollution from Power Plants Press release, August ,  New bipartisan legislation would give U.S. orphan well management efforts a huge boost Blog post, August ,  See more Our clean air experts We bring wide-ranging perspectives and skills to our clean air work. Meet some of the people who make it happen. Sarah Vogel Senior Vice President, Healthy Communities Ramon Alvarez Associate Chief Scientist Julia Gohlke Lead Senior Scientist, Health Xinhao Huang Manager, Global Clean Air China  Environmental Policy Aileen Nowlan U.S. Policy Director, Global Clean Air Initiative Follow Sergio Sánchez Senior Policy Director, Global Clean Air Partner perspective Today, more than ever, we must protect people, especially the most vulnerable, from environmental pollution. EDF is a critical partner in this effort. Georges C. Benjamin, M.D. American Public Health Association Media contact Sharyn Stein () - (office) () - (mobile) Email Limited-time $-for-$ match on monthly gifts Donating now doubles your impact Make a one-time donation Another easy way to help Join a powerful force of over  million allies Get tips on how you can protect the environment Get alerts when there are crucial petitions to sign About EDF Commitment to diversity Careers Offices News and resources News and updates Reports and publications For the media Members Become a member Take action Contact  LinkedIn  Facebook TikTok Copyright ©  Environmental Defense Fund. All Rights Reserved. Privacy statement. Environmental Defense Fund is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization under Section (c)() of the Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law. Tax identification number -. EDF operates with the highest standards of ethics and open, honest communication. Read our whistleblower policy or report a concern through our confidential, third-party compliance site. 
 Air pollutionSkip to main contentSkip to navigationSkip to footerAn official website of the European Union | How do you know?All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain.See all EU institutions and bodiesEnvironmental information systemsBiodiversity Information System for EuropeClimate Adaptation PlatformCopernicus in situ componentEuropean Industrial Emissions PortalForest Information System for EuropeInformation Platform for Chemical MonitoringMarine Water Information System for EuropeFresh Water Information System for EuropeTopicsAnalysis and dataCountriesNewsroomAbout usTopicsIn-depth topicsAir pollutionAir pollutionModified  Sept ImageErika Zolli, My CityEEAShareMost European city dwellers are exposed to unsafe levels of air pollution. Improving air quality to match World Health Organization (WHO)-recommended levels could prevent more than half of premature deaths caused by exposure to fine particulate matter.Overview Key facts EU action Air pollution emissions have declined in the last two decades, resulting in better air quality. Despite this improvement, air pollution remains the largest environmental health risk in Europe. Exposure to fine particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide levels above the World Health Organization recommendations cause an estimated , and , premature deaths, respectively, in . These pollutants are linked to asthma, heart disease and stroke.Air pollution also causes morbidity. People live with diseases related to exposure to air pollution; this is a burden in terms of personal suffering as well as significant costs to the healthcare sector.Society’s most vulnerable are more susceptible to air pollution impacts. Lower socio-economic groups tend to be exposed to higher levels of air pollution, while older people, children and those with pre-existing health conditions are more susceptible. Over , deaths in people under  years of age are estimated to be caused by air pollution every year in EEA member and collaborating countries.Besides health issues, air pollution can considerably impact Europe’s economy due to increased healthcare costs, reduced life expectancy, and lost working days across sectors. It also damages vegetation and ecosystems, water and soil quality, and local ecosystems. Across the EU, it is common to have air pollution levels that are higher than the latest WHO recommendations. Still, there are signs of improvement.In , % of the urban population was exposed to concentrations of fine particulate matter above the health-based guideline level set by the World Health Organization.Over , deaths in people under  years of age are estimated to be caused by air pollution every year in EEA member and collaborating countries[] .Data from  show that Central-eastern Europe and Italy reported the highest concentrations of particulate matter, primarily due to the burning of solid fuels for domestic heating and their use in industry.All EU countries reported levels of ozone and nitrogen dioxide above the health-based guideline levels set by the World Health Organization. Around , premature deaths are caused by fine particulate matter and , by nitrogen dioxide (NO) each year. Overall, % of the EU’s urban population was exposed to levels of fine particulate matter above the latest guidelines set by WHO in . Read more in our air quality reportSince the s, the EU has adopted strict policies on air quality. The EU’s Ambient Air Quality Directives set air quality standards for  air pollutants. These directives also define common methods to monitor, assess and inform the public on ambient air quality in the EU. The European Commission has proposed an updated Directive on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe, with a key goal being to bring EU standards closer to recommendations from the WHO.To see where we are in relation to these goals, a network of more than , air quality monitoring stations creates reliable, objective, comparable information on air quality. When levels are above the limit or target values, Member States are expected to prepare an air quality plan or programme that addresses responsible sources and ensures compliance. The Zero Pollution Action Plan also sets the  target of improving air quality, with a focus on PM., in order to reduce the number of premature deaths caused by air pollution in the EU by a minimum of %, relative to those in .The National Emission reduction Commitments Directive sets national emission reduction commitments for Member States and the EU for five important air pollutants: nitrogen oxides (NOx), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), sulphur dioxide (SO), ammonia (NH) and fine particulate matter (PM.). These pollutants contribute to poor air quality, leading to significant negative impacts on human health and the environment.The EEA supports these policies through data, indicators and assessments, including the annual air quality report and the zero pollution monitoring assessment. See the EU policies we supportPress releases and articlesEmissions of key air pollutants continue to decline across the EU, reducing ammonia poses biggest challenge.Air pollution levels across Europe still not safe, especially for childrenSee allPublicationsEU Informative Inventory Report under the Air Convention  – Air pollution in Europe:  reporting status under the National Emission reduction Commitments DirectiveAir pollution and children's healthZero pollution monitoring assessmentEurope’s air quality status EU Informative Inventory Report under the Air Convention  – Europe's air quality status See allIndicatorsEmissions of the main air pollutants in EuropeEmissions and energy use in large combustion plants in EuropePersistent organic pollutant emissions in EuropeSee allMaps and chartsEuropean city air quality viewerLocal air quality data: European Air Quality IndexAir quality statisticsUp-to-date air quality dataNational air pollutant emissions data viewer -Air pollutant emissions data viewerSee allDatahubNational emissions reported to the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP Convention)National Emission reductions Commitments (NEC) Directive emission inventory dataSee allCountry fact sheetsAir pollution country fact sheetsSee allInfo pagesΗow air pollution affects our healthNational Emission reduction Commitments DirectiveFrequently asked questionsSee allPremature deaths in Europe in from chronic exposure to fine particulate matter from chronic nitrogen dioxide exposure from acute ozone exposureSource: EEA, , 'Health impacts of air pollution in Europe, .Air pollution damages health during childhood and increases the risk of diseases later in lifeSource: Health impacts of air qualityReducing emissions of air pollutants in EuropeEurope has put in place legislation to reduce emissions from harmful air pollutants. The National Emission reduction Commitments Directive (NECD) sets national emission reduction commitments for Member States and the EU for five important air pollutants: nitrogen oxides (NOx), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), sulphur dioxide (SO), ammonia (NH) and fine particulate matter (PM.). These pollutants contribute to poor air quality, leading to significant negative impacts on human health and the environment.Every year, the EEA publishes the most recent reported data and a briefing on the EU Member States' progress in meeting their emission reduction commitments.In ,  Member States met their respective - national emission reduction commitments for each of the five main pollutants, while  Member States failed to do so for at least one of the five main air pollutants. For one Member State, the status is unknown because its national inventory was not reported.The biggest challenge for the period - is reducing ammonia emissions:  Member States need to cut their  emission levels to fulfil their - reduction commitments. The agriculture sector is the principal source, responsible for % of total ammonia emissions. Since , ammonia emissions have only slightly decreased in many Member States and in some cases have increased.Read more on air pollutant emissionsCheck air quality at any time: European Air Quality Index & AppHow clean is the air you’re breathing right now? The European Air Quality Index provides information on the current air quality situation based on measurements from more than  air quality monitoring stations across Europe. The Index allows citizens to use an interactive map to check the air quality at station level, based on five key pollutants that harm people's health and the environment: namely particulate matter (both PM. and PM), ground-level ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide.The index is also available as an app for mobile phones in all EU languages.Explore the European Air Quality IndexAir quality in your city: how clean is it compared to other European cities?Check our air quality city viewerImageNeli Petrova, Well with Nature EEAMore informationOther topics you might be interested in:ChemicalsEnvironmental health impactsEnvironmental inequalities HealthNoise Pollution Road transport Transport and mobilityUrban sustainability External links:European Industrial Emissions Portal (EIEP)About usFAQsCareersContact usSign up to our newsletterEnvironmental information systemsPrivacySitemapCMS Logintop 
 IQAir | First in Air Quality Air Quality Air Monitors Air Purifiers Face Masks For Business News Support Dashboard Air Quality Air Monitors Air Purifiers Face Masks For Business News Support International Explore your Air QualityAir Quality Monitors order now Air Purifiers discover Large Room Air Purifier more details Smart Air Purifiers Atem Series US AQI PM. #MAJOR CITYUS AQI Riyadh, Saudi Arabia   Beijing, China   Lahore, Pakistan   Jakarta, Indonesia   Kuching, Malaysia   Dhaka, Bangladesh   Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia   Dubai, United Arab Emirates   Chengdu, China   Kampala, Uganda  SEE FULL RANKING Most polluted cities See a ranking of ’s most polluted cities. Most polluted countriesregions See a ranking of ’s most polluted countries. News IQAir safeguards air quality at the  Museum Workshop Discover how IQAir's advanced filtration improved  Museum Workshop's air quality, creating a safer environment for visitors and staff. days agoGet ready for World Clean Air DayLearn about World Clean Air Day and efforts you can take part in for better air quality.  days agoWhat is Swiss National Day?Learn what Swiss identity means to IQAir as an international Swiss-born company. months agoDoes wildfire smoke make allergies worse?Wildfire smoke is hazardous, but just how unhealthy can it be for allergy sufferers? months agoIQAir World Air Quality Report  Finds Only % of Countries Meet WHO PM. Air Pollution GuidelineThe  World Air Quality Report analyzed PM. air pollution measurements from air monitoring stations around the world. Learn more. months ago more air quality news Our product solutions Breathe cleaner air anytime, anywhere. See our range of air improvement products for your home, office or on the go. # Air quality appGet air quality information on your phone for over ' locations and cities in over  countries.Air quality monitorsEverything you need to monitor the air quality indoors and outdoors.Air cleaning solutionsSee IQAir's wide range of air purification products for homes, offices, schools and many other applications.Stay Informed. Download # air quality appRated .Air pollution forecast, pollution alerts and much more to help you plan your days and keep protected against air pollutionAir quality around the worldReal-time air quality report and air pollution forecastAfghanistanKabulAlbaniaTiranaArgentinaBuenos AiresCordobaAustraliaAdelaideBrisbaneCanberraMelbournePerthSydneyAustriaViennaBahrainManamaBangladeshChittagongDhakaKhulnaRajshahiBelarusMinskBelgiumBrusselsLiègeBrazilBelemBelo HorizonteBrasiliaCuritibaFortalezaManausRecifeRio de JaneiroSalvadorSao PauloBruneiBandar Seri BegawanBulgariaSofiaCambodiaPhnom PenhCanadaCalgaryEdmontonMontrealOttawaTorontoChileSantiagoChinaAnyangBeijingChangchunChangshaChengduChongqingDalianDongguanFoshanGuangzhouHangzhouHarbinHefeiJiaozuoJinanKunmingLiaochengNanjingNanningNingboQingdaoShanghaiShantouShenyangShenzhenShijiazhuangSuzhouTaiyuanTianjinUrumqiWuhanXingtaiXinxiangZhengzhouColombiaBarranquillaBogotaMedellinCroatiaZagrebCyprusNicosiaCzech RepublicBrnoOstravaPlzenPragueDenmarkCopenhagenEgyptAlexandriaCairoGizaEstoniaTallinnFinlandHelsinkiFranceLyonMarseilleNiceParisToulouseGermanyBerlinDüsseldorfFrankfurt am MainHamburgMunichStuttgartGhanaAccraGreeceAthensThessalonikiGuatemalaGuatemala CityHungaryBudapestIcelandReykjavikIndiaAgraAhmedabadAllahabadAmritsarAurangabadBhopalChennaiCoimbatoreDelhiDhanbadFaridabadGayaGhaziabadGurgaonGwaliorHaoraHyderabadIndoreJabalpurJaipurJodhpurKanpurKolkataKotaLucknowLudhianaMaduraiMeerutMuzaffarpurNagpurNashikNavi MumbaiPatialaPatnaPuneRaipurRajkotRanchiSrinagarSuratThaneVadodaraVaranasiVijayawadaVisakhapatnamIndonesiaBandungBekasiJakartaMakassarMedanSurabayaIranAhvazIsfahanKarajKermanshahMashhadQomRashtShirazTabrizTehranUrmiaZahedanIrelandDublinIsraelJerusalemItalyNaplesRomeJapanChibaHamamatsuKawasakiKitakyushuKobeKumamotoKyotoNagoyaOsakaSakaiSapporoTokyoYokohamaKazakhstanAlmatyShymkentKosovoPristinaKyrgyzstanBishkekLatviaRigaLithuaniaVilniusMacao SARMacaoMalaysiaGeorge TownKuala LumpurMexicoCiudad JuárezCuliacanGuadalajaraLeonMexico CityMonterreyNezahualcóyotlTijuanaZapopanMoldovaChisinauMonacoMonacoMongoliaUlaanbaatarMoroccoCasablancaMarrakeshSaleTangierNetherlandsAmsterdamRotterdamNorwayOsloPakistanFaisalabadGujranwalaHyderabadKarachiLahoreMultanPeshawarRawalpindiPanamaPanamaPhilippinesAntipoloCaloocanCebu CityDavao CityManilaQuezon CityPolandGdanskKrakowLodzPoznanWarsawWroclawPortugalLisbonQatarAl WakrahDohaRomaniaBucharestRussiaChelyabinskKazanKrasnodarKrasnoyarskMoscowNovosibirskOmskPermSaint PetersburgSamaraSaratovUfaVolgogradVoronezhYekaterinburgSaudi ArabiaDammamJeddahMeccaMedinaRiyadhTa'ifSerbiaBelgradeSlovakiaBratislavaSloveniaLjubljanaSouth AfricaCape TownDurbanEast LondonJohannesburgPort ElizabethPretoriaSoshanguveVereenigingSouth KoreaBusanDaeguDaejeonGwangjuIncheonSeoulSuwonUlsanSpainBarcelonaMadridMalagaValenciaSwedenStockholmSwitzerlandBaselBernZurichTaiwanKaohsiungTaichungTainanTaipeiTaoyuanThailandBangkokChiang MaiChiang RaiMae ChanNakhon RatchasimaPaiPhuketTurkeyAdanaAnkaraAntalyaBursaGaziantepIstanbulKayseriKonyaUkraineDniproKharkivKyivOdessaUnited Arab EmiratesAbu DhabiDubaiUnited KingdomBirminghamBradfordBristolCardiffEdinburghGlasgowLeedsLiverpoolLondonManchesterNottinghamSheffieldUSAAlbuquerqueAtlantaAustinBaltimoreBostonCharlotteChicagoDallasDenverFort WorthHartfordHoustonIndianapolisJacksonvilleLas VegasLos AngelesMilwaukeeNew YorkPhiladelphiaPhoenixSacramentoSalt Lake CitySan AntonioSan DiegoSan FranciscoSan JoseSeattleWashingtonUzbekistanTashkentVietnamCan ThoDa NangHaiphongHanoi Cart × Your cart is empty Connect With IQAir Sign up for our newsletter Email About IQAirAbout UsContact usCareersMediaNewsroomPress releasesMedia contactPartnerBecome a dealer International AQI US, Metric Terms of Use Terms of Sale Privacy Policy ©  IQAir. All rights reserved Most polluted cities among major cities in the worldMost polluted countries among major countries in the worldThis hourly major city ranking compares  global cities with measured PM. data. Click to learn more.
 Air pollution, facts and information Skip to contentNewslettersSubscribeMenuReferenceAir pollution, explainedPollutants in the air aren't always visible and come from many different sources.:Climate : Air PollutionByChristina NunezPublished February , •  min readShareTweetEmailDespite decades of progress, the air quality in the United States has started to decline over the past few years, according to data provided in summer  by the Environmental Protection Agency. The agency recorded  percent more days with unhealthy air in the country in  and  compared to the average from  to .The reasons for the recent decline in air quality remain unclear, says the agency, but may be related to high numbers of wildfires, a warming climate, and increasing human consumption patterns driven by population growth and a strong economy. The long-term outlook also remains unclear, even as politicians debate air pollution standards.What is air pollution?Air pollution is a mix of particles and gases that can reach harmful concentrations both outside and indoors. Its effects can range from higher disease risks to rising temperatures. Soot, smoke, mold, pollen, methane, and carbon dioxide are a just few examples of common pollutants.In the U.S., one measure of outdoor air pollution is the Air Quality Index, or AQI which rates air conditions across the country based on concentrations of five major pollutants: ground-level ozone, particle pollution (or particulate matter), carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide. Some of those also contribute to indoor air pollution, along with radon, cigarette smoke, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), formaldehyde, asbestos, and other substances.A global health hazardPoor air quality kills people. Worldwide, bad outdoor air caused an estimated . million premature deaths in , about  percent of them in low- and middle-income countries, according to the World Health Organization. Indoor smoke is an ongoing health threat to the  billion people who cook and heat their homes by burning biomass, kerosene, and coal. Air pollution has been linked to higher rates of cancer, heart disease, stroke, and respiratory diseases such as asthma. In the U.S. nearly  million people—over  percent of the population—are at risk of disease and premature death because of air pollution, according to American Lung Association estimates.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.    <p>An iceberg melts in the waters off Antarctica. Climate change has accelerated the rate of ice loss across the continent.<br> <p> An iceberg melts in the waters off Antarctica. Climate change has accelerated the rate of ice loss across the continent. Photograph by Paul Nicklen, Nat Geo Image CollectionWhile those effects emerge from long-term exposure, air pollution can also cause short-term problems such as sneezing and coughing, eye irritation, headaches, and dizziness. Particulate matter smaller than  micrometers (classified as PM and the even smaller PM.) pose higher health risks because they can be breathed deeply into the lungs and may cross into the bloodstream.Air pollutants cause less-direct health effects when they contribute to climate change. Heat waves, extreme weather, food supply disruptions, and other effects related to increased greenhouse gases can have negative impacts on human health. The U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment released in  noted, for example, that a changing climate "could expose more people in North America to ticks that carry Lyme disease and mosquitoes that transmit viruses such as West Nile, chikungunya, dengue, and Zika."Environmental impactsThough many living things emit carbon dioxide when they breathe, the gas is widely considered to be a pollutant when associated with cars, planes, power plants, and other human activities that involve the burning of fossil fuels such as gasoline and natural gas. That's because carbon dioxide is the most common of the greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the atmosphere and contribute to climate change. Humans have pumped enough carbon dioxide into the atmosphere over the past  years to raise its levels higher than they have been for hundreds of thousands of years.Other greenhouse gases include methane —which comes from such sources as landfills, the natural gas industry, and gas emitted by livestock—and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which were used in refrigerants and aerosol propellants until they were banned in the late s because of their deteriorating effect on Earth's ozone layer.Greenhouse gases are a key factor in the Earth's changing climate.Photograph by Peter Essick, Nat Geo Image CollectionPlease be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Another pollutant associated with climate change is sulfur dioxide, a component of smog. Sulfur dioxide and closely related chemicals are known primarily as a cause of acid rain. But they also reflect light when released in the atmosphere, which keeps sunlight out and creates a cooling effect. Volcanic eruptions can spew massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, sometimes causing cooling that lasts for years. In fact, volcanoes used to be the main source of atmospheric sulfur dioxide; today, people are.Airborne particles, depending on their chemical makeup, can also have direct effects separate from climate change. They can change or deplete nutrients in soil and waterways, harm forests and crops, and damage cultural icons such as monuments and statues.What can be done?Countries around the world are tackling various forms of air pollution. China, for example, is making strides in cleaning up smog-choked skies from years of rapid industrial expansion, partly by closing or canceling coal-fired power plants. In the U.S., California has been a leader in setting emissions standards aimed at improving air quality, especially in places like famously hazy Los Angeles. And a variety of efforts aim to bring cleaner cooking options to places where hazardous cookstoves are prevalent.In any home, people can safeguard against indoor air pollution by increasing ventilation, testing for radon gas, using air purifiers, running kitchen and bathroom exhaust fans, and avoiding smoking. When working on home projects, look for paint and other products low in volatile organic compounds: organizations such as Green Seal, UL (GREENGUARD), and the U.S. Green Building Council can help.To curb global warming, a variety of measures need to be taken, such as adding more renewable energy and replacing gasoline-fueled cars with zero-emissions vehicles such as electric ones. On a larger scale, governments at all levels are making commitments to limit emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The Paris Agreement, ratified on November , , is one effort to combat climate change on a global scale. And the Kigali Amendment seeks to further the progress made by the Montreal Protocol, banning heat-trapping hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in addition to CFCs.ShareTweetEmailRead This NextSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.EnvironmentSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.Hot, humid weather can create the perfect conditions for a surprise afternoon storm—but where and when those occur may change as the planet warms.How ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyHistory & CultureHow ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyFrom identifying new human species to unraveling the evolution of diseases, the ability to reconstruct ancient genomes is a game-changer for researchers who can navigate the ethical perils.Slow down in the Cinque Terre—and enjoy a glass of wineTravelSlow down in the Cinque Terre—and enjoy a glass of wineBy celebrating local traditions—and some of the world’s steepest vineyards—winemakers uncork more sustainable trips in this over touristed Italian region.Watch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponAnimalsWatch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponUsing a technique passed down through generations, these orcas have mastered hunting—on ice.Go FurtherAnimalsMeet the dog who can find rare sea turtle nests at a shocking success rateAnimalsMeet the dog who can find rare sea turtle nests at a shocking success rateWatch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponAnimalsWatch these orcas turn the waves into a weaponAnother rare spotless giraffe has been found. What’s going on?AnimalsAnother rare spotless giraffe has been found. What’s going on?Watch humpbacks intervene as orcas attack a seal in AntarcticaAnimalsWatch humpbacks intervene as orcas attack a seal in AntarcticaNoticing more cicadas this year in the U.S.? There’s a reasonAnimalsNoticing more cicadas this year in the U.S.? There’s a reasonCan great white sharks be friends?AnimalsCan great white sharks be friends?EnvironmentHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.EnvironmentHurricanes are escalating more quickly than ever. Here’s why.How  volunteers pulled off one of the most difficult cave rescues everEnvironmentHow  volunteers pulled off one of the most difficult cave rescues everStep inside  innovative new workplaces around the globePaid Content for AdvertiserStep inside  innovative new workplaces around the globeSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.EnvironmentSummer storms can strike suddenly. Here’s what causes them.This summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeEnvironmentThis summer's extreme weather is a sign of things to comeWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'EnvironmentWhat does a melting glacier sound like? 'Gunshots.'History & CultureWho were the Tarim Basin mummies? Even scientists were surprised.History & CultureWho were the Tarim Basin mummies? Even scientists were surprised.The true story of the Osage murdersHistory & CultureThe true story of the Osage murdersThis crumbling dam could wipe out cultural treasuresHistory & CultureThis crumbling dam could wipe out cultural treasuresWhat ever happened to cursive writing?History & CultureWhat ever happened to cursive writing?Why are there four heads of John the Baptist?History & CultureWhy are there four heads of John the Baptist?How ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyHistory & CultureHow ancient DNA has revolutionized archaeologyScienceIn the hunt for alien life, this planet just became a top suspectScienceIn the hunt for alien life, this planet just became a top suspectDid you forget what to do if you get COVID? Here’s a refresher.ScienceCoronavirus CoverageDid you forget what to do if you get COVID? Here’s a refresher.This is what the first stars looked like as they were being bornScienceThis is what the first stars looked like as they were being bornAre you drinking water all wrong? Here’s what you need to know about hydrating.ScienceAre you drinking water all wrong? Here’s what you need to know about hydrating.Inside the making of the world’s most powerful telescopeScienceProofInside the making of the world’s most powerful telescopeNASA’s Webb telescope is rewriting the story of space and timeScienceNASA’s Webb telescope is rewriting the story of space and timeTravelIt’s leaf-peeping season: Avoid the crowds on these scenic drivesTravelAdventures EverywhereIt’s leaf-peeping season: Avoid the crowds on these scenic drivesExplore New Zealand's newest Great Walk trailTravelExplore New Zealand's newest Great Walk trailYour UK autumn camping guidePaid Content for AdvertiserYour UK autumn camping guideShould you still travel if you have Covid?TravelShould you still travel if you have Covid?Discover Zurich’s progressive plant-based food scenePaid Content for AdvertiserDiscover Zurich’s progressive plant-based food sceneHow to plan a wine-tasting tour in ChampagneTravelHow to plan a wine-tasting tour in ChampagneSubscriber Exclusive ContentpreviousMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExplorenext See MoreLegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsChildren's Online Privacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsAbout Nielsen MeasurementDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationOur SitesNat Geo HomeAttend a Live EventBook a TripBuy MapsInspire Your KidsShop Nat GeoVisit the D.C. MuseumWatch TVLearn About Our ImpactSupport Our MissionMastheadPress RoomAdvertise With UsJoin UsSubscribeCustomer ServiceRenew SubscriptionManage Your SubscriptionWork at Nat GeoSign Up for Our NewslettersContribute to Protect the PlanetFollow usNational Geographic FacebookNational Geographic National Geographic United States (Change)Copyright © - National Geographic SocietyCopyright © - National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved 
 Air pollutionSkip to main contentSkip to navigationSkip to footerAn official website of the European Union | How do you know?All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain.See all EU institutions and bodiesEnvironmental information systemsBiodiversity Information System for EuropeClimate Adaptation PlatformCopernicus in situ componentEuropean Industrial Emissions PortalForest Information System for EuropeInformation Platform for Chemical MonitoringMarine Water Information System for EuropeFresh Water Information System for EuropeTopicsAnalysis and dataCountriesNewsroomAbout usTopicsIn-depth topicsAir pollutionAir pollutionModified  Sept ImageErika Zolli, My CityEEAShareMost European city dwellers are exposed to unsafe levels of air pollution. Improving air quality to match World Health Organization (WHO)-recommended levels could prevent more than half of premature deaths caused by exposure to fine particulate matter.Overview Key facts EU action Air pollution emissions have declined in the last two decades, resulting in better air quality. Despite this improvement, air pollution remains the largest environmental health risk in Europe. Exposure to fine particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide levels above the World Health Organization recommendations cause an estimated , and , premature deaths, respectively, in . These pollutants are linked to asthma, heart disease and stroke.Air pollution also causes morbidity. People live with diseases related to exposure to air pollution; this is a burden in terms of personal suffering as well as significant costs to the healthcare sector.Society’s most vulnerable are more susceptible to air pollution impacts. Lower socio-economic groups tend to be exposed to higher levels of air pollution, while older people, children and those with pre-existing health conditions are more susceptible. Over , deaths in people under  years of age are estimated to be caused by air pollution every year in EEA member and collaborating countries.Besides health issues, air pollution can considerably impact Europe’s economy due to increased healthcare costs, reduced life expectancy, and lost working days across sectors. It also damages vegetation and ecosystems, water and soil quality, and local ecosystems. Across the EU, it is common to have air pollution levels that are higher than the latest WHO recommendations. Still, there are signs of improvement.In , % of the urban population was exposed to concentrations of fine particulate matter above the health-based guideline level set by the World Health Organization.Over , deaths in people under  years of age are estimated to be caused by air pollution every year in EEA member and collaborating countries[] .Data from  show that Central-eastern Europe and Italy reported the highest concentrations of particulate matter, primarily due to the burning of solid fuels for domestic heating and their use in industry.All EU countries reported levels of ozone and nitrogen dioxide above the health-based guideline levels set by the World Health Organization. Around , premature deaths are caused by fine particulate matter and , by nitrogen dioxide (NO) each year. Overall, % of the EU’s urban population was exposed to levels of fine particulate matter above the latest guidelines set by WHO in . Read more in our air quality reportSince the s, the EU has adopted strict policies on air quality. The EU’s Ambient Air Quality Directives set air quality standards for  air pollutants. These directives also define common methods to monitor, assess and inform the public on ambient air quality in the EU. The European Commission has proposed an updated Directive on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe, with a key goal being to bring EU standards closer to recommendations from the WHO.To see where we are in relation to these goals, a network of more than , air quality monitoring stations creates reliable, objective, comparable information on air quality. When levels are above the limit or target values, Member States are expected to prepare an air quality plan or programme that addresses responsible sources and ensures compliance. The Zero Pollution Action Plan also sets the  target of improving air quality, with a focus on PM., in order to reduce the number of premature deaths caused by air pollution in the EU by a minimum of %, relative to those in .The National Emission reduction Commitments Directive sets national emission reduction commitments for Member States and the EU for five important air pollutants: nitrogen oxides (NOx), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), sulphur dioxide (SO), ammonia (NH) and fine particulate matter (PM.). These pollutants contribute to poor air quality, leading to significant negative impacts on human health and the environment.The EEA supports these policies through data, indicators and assessments, including the annual air quality report and the zero pollution monitoring assessment. See the EU policies we supportPress releases and articlesEmissions of key air pollutants continue to decline across the EU, reducing ammonia poses biggest challenge.Air pollution levels across Europe still not safe, especially for childrenSee allPublicationsEU Informative Inventory Report under the Air Convention  – Air pollution in Europe:  reporting status under the National Emission reduction Commitments DirectiveAir pollution and children's healthZero pollution monitoring assessmentEurope’s air quality status EU Informative Inventory Report under the Air Convention  – Europe's air quality status See allIndicatorsEmissions of the main air pollutants in EuropeEmissions and energy use in large combustion plants in EuropePersistent organic pollutant emissions in EuropeSee allMaps and chartsEuropean city air quality viewerLocal air quality data: European Air Quality IndexAir quality statisticsUp-to-date air quality dataNational air pollutant emissions data viewer -Air pollutant emissions data viewerSee allDatahubNational emissions reported to the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP Convention)National Emission reductions Commitments (NEC) Directive emission inventory dataSee allCountry fact sheetsAir pollution country fact sheetsSee allInfo pagesΗow air pollution affects our healthNational Emission reduction Commitments DirectiveFrequently asked questionsSee allPremature deaths in Europe in from chronic exposure to fine particulate matter from chronic nitrogen dioxide exposure from acute ozone exposureSource: EEA, , 'Health impacts of air pollution in Europe, .Air pollution damages health during childhood and increases the risk of diseases later in lifeSource: Health impacts of air qualityReducing emissions of air pollutants in EuropeEurope has put in place legislation to reduce emissions from harmful air pollutants. The National Emission reduction Commitments Directive (NECD) sets national emission reduction commitments for Member States and the EU for five important air pollutants: nitrogen oxides (NOx), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), sulphur dioxide (SO), ammonia (NH) and fine particulate matter (PM.). These pollutants contribute to poor air quality, leading to significant negative impacts on human health and the environment.Every year, the EEA publishes the most recent reported data and a briefing on the EU Member States' progress in meeting their emission reduction commitments.In ,  Member States met their respective - national emission reduction commitments for each of the five main pollutants, while  Member States failed to do so for at least one of the five main air pollutants. For one Member State, the status is unknown because its national inventory was not reported.The biggest challenge for the period - is reducing ammonia emissions:  Member States need to cut their  emission levels to fulfil their - reduction commitments. The agriculture sector is the principal source, responsible for % of total ammonia emissions. Since , ammonia emissions have only slightly decreased in many Member States and in some cases have increased.Read more on air pollutant emissionsCheck air quality at any time: European Air Quality Index & AppHow clean is the air you’re breathing right now? The European Air Quality Index provides information on the current air quality situation based on measurements from more than  air quality monitoring stations across Europe. The Index allows citizens to use an interactive map to check the air quality at station level, based on five key pollutants that harm people's health and the environment: namely particulate matter (both PM. and PM), ground-level ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide.The index is also available as an app for mobile phones in all EU languages.Explore the European Air Quality IndexAir quality in your city: how clean is it compared to other European cities?Check our air quality city viewerImageNeli Petrova, Well with Nature EEAMore informationOther topics you might be interested in:ChemicalsEnvironmental health impactsEnvironmental inequalities HealthNoise Pollution Road transport Transport and mobilityUrban sustainability External links:European Industrial Emissions Portal (EIEP)About usFAQsCareersContact usSign up to our newsletterEnvironmental information systemsPrivacySitemapCMS Logintop 
